<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-2-2" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-2-2-1" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter I. The
            Engagement</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Madame
            Hohlakov was again the first to meet Alyosha. She was flustered;
            something important had happened. Katerina Ivanovna's hysterics
            had ended in a fainting fit, and then <span class="tei tei-q">“a
            terrible, awful weakness had followed, she lay with her eyes
            turned up and was delirious. Now she was in a fever. They had
            sent for Herzenstube; they had sent for the aunts. The aunts were
            already here, but Herzenstube had not yet come. They were all
            sitting in her room, waiting. She was unconscious now, and what
            if it turned to brain fever!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Madame
            Hohlakov looked gravely alarmed. <span class="tei tei-q">“This is
            serious, serious,”</span> she added at every word, as though
            nothing that had happened to her before had been serious. Alyosha
            listened with distress, and was beginning to describe his
            adventures, but she interrupted him at the first words. She had
            not time to listen. She begged him to sit with Lise and wait for
            her there.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Lise,”</span> she whispered almost in his ear,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Lise has greatly surprised me just now,
            dear Alexey Fyodorovitch. She touched me, too, and so my heart
            forgives her everything. Only fancy, as soon as you had gone, she
            began to be truly remorseful for having laughed at you to-day and
            yesterday, though she was not laughing at you, but only joking.
            But she was seriously sorry for it, almost ready to cry, so that
            I was quite surprised. She has never been really sorry for
            laughing at me, but has only made a joke of it. And you know she
            is laughing at me every minute. But this time she was in earnest.
            She thinks a great deal of your opinion, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and
            don't take offense or be wounded by her if you can help it. I am
            never hard upon her, for she's such a clever little thing. Would
            you <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page233">[pg 233]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg233" name="Pg233"></a> believe it? She
            said just now that you were a friend of her childhood,
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘the greatest friend of her
            childhood’</span>—just think of that—<span class="tei tei-q">‘greatest friend’</span>—and what about me? She has
            very strong feelings and memories, and, what's more, she uses
            these phrases, most unexpected words, which come out all of a
            sudden when you least expect them. She spoke lately about a
            pine-tree, for instance: there used to be a pine-tree standing in
            our garden in her early childhood. Very likely it's standing
            there still; so there's no need to speak in the past tense.
            Pine-trees are not like people, Alexey Fyodorovitch, they don't
            change quickly. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Mamma,’</span> she said,
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘I remember this pine-tree as in a
            dream,’</span> only she said something so original about it that
            I can't repeat it. Besides, I've forgotten it. Well, good-by! I
            am so worried I feel I shall go out of my mind. Ah! Alexey
            Fyodorovitch, I've been out of my mind twice in my life. Go to
            Lise, cheer her up, as you always can so charmingly.
            Lise,”</span> she cried, going to her door, <span class="tei tei-q">“here I've brought you Alexey Fyodorovitch, whom you
            insulted so. He is not at all angry, I assure you; on the
            contrary, he is surprised that you could suppose so.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">Merci, maman.</span></span>
            Come in, Alexey Fyodorovitch.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha went
            in. Lise looked rather embarrassed, and at once flushed crimson.
            She was evidently ashamed of something, and, as people always do
            in such cases, she began immediately talking of other things, as
            though they were of absorbing interest to her at the moment.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mamma has just told me all about the two hundred
            roubles, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and your taking them to that poor
            officer ... and she told me all the awful story of how he had
            been insulted ... and you know, although mamma muddles things ...
            she always rushes from one thing to another ... I cried when I
            heard. Well, did you give him the money and how is that poor man
            getting on?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The fact is I didn't give it to him, and it's a long
            story,”</span> answered Alyosha, as though he, too, could think
            of nothing but his regret at having failed, yet Lise saw
            perfectly well that he, too, looked away, and that he, too, was
            trying to talk of other things.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha sat
            down to the table and began to tell his story, but at the first
            words he lost his embarrassment and gained the whole of Lise's
            attention as well. He spoke with deep feeling, under <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page234">[pg 234]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg234" name="Pg234"></a> the influence of the strong
            impression he had just received, and he succeeded in telling his
            story well and circumstantially. In old days in Moscow he had
            been fond of coming to Lise and describing to her what had just
            happened to him, what he had read, or what he remembered of his
            childhood. Sometimes they had made day-dreams and woven whole
            romances together—generally cheerful and amusing ones. Now they
            both felt suddenly transported to the old days in Moscow, two
            years before. Lise was extremely touched by his story. Alyosha
            described Ilusha with warm feeling. When he finished describing
            how the luckless man trampled on the money, Lise could not help
            clasping her hands and crying out:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“So you didn't give him the money! So you let him run
            away! Oh, dear, you ought to have run after him!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, Lise; it's better I didn't run after
            him,”</span> said Alyosha, getting up from his chair and walking
            thoughtfully across the room.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How so? How is it better? Now they are without food
            and their case is hopeless?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Not hopeless, for the two hundred roubles will still
            come to them. He'll take the money to-morrow. To-morrow he will
            be sure to take it,”</span> said Alyosha, pacing up and down,
            pondering. <span class="tei tei-q">“You see, Lise,”</span> he
            went on, stopping suddenly before her, <span class="tei tei-q">“I
            made one blunder, but that, even that, is all for the
            best.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What blunder, and why is it for the
            best?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'll tell you. He is a man of weak and timorous
            character; he has suffered so much and is very good-natured. I
            keep wondering why he took offense so suddenly, for I assure you,
            up to the last minute, he did not know that he was going to
            trample on the notes. And I think now that there was a great deal
            to offend him ... and it could not have been otherwise in his
            position.... To begin with, he was sore at having been so glad of
            the money in my presence and not having concealed it from me. If
            he had been pleased, but not so much; if he had not shown it; if
            he had begun affecting scruples and difficulties, as other people
            do when they take money, he might still endure to take it. But he
            was too genuinely delighted, and that was mortifying. Ah, Lise,
            he is a good and truthful man—that's the worst of the whole
            business. All the while he talked, his voice was so weak, so
            broken, he talked so fast, so fast, he kept laughing such a
            laugh, or perhaps he was crying—yes, I am sure <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page235">[pg 235]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg235" name="Pg235"></a> he was crying, he was so
            delighted—and he talked about his daughters—and about the
            situation he could get in another town.... And when he had poured
            out his heart, he felt ashamed at having shown me his inmost soul
            like that. So he began to hate me at once. He is one of those
            awfully sensitive poor people. What had made him feel most
            ashamed was that he had given in too soon and accepted me as a
            friend, you see. At first he almost flew at me and tried to
            intimidate me, but as soon as he saw the money he had begun
            embracing me; he kept touching me with his hands. This must have
            been how he came to feel it all so humiliating, and then I made
            that blunder, a very important one. I suddenly said to him that
            if he had not money enough to move to another town, we would give
            it to him, and, indeed, I myself would give him as much as he
            wanted out of my own money. That struck him all at once. Why, he
            thought, did I put myself forward to help him? You know, Lise,
            it's awfully hard for a man who has been injured, when other
            people look at him as though they were his benefactors.... I've
            heard that; Father Zossima told me so. I don't know how to put
            it, but I have often seen it myself. And I feel like that myself,
            too. And the worst of it was that though he did not know, up to
            the very last minute, that he would trample on the notes, he had
            a kind of presentiment of it, I am sure of that. That's just what
            made him so ecstatic, that he had that presentiment.... And
            though it's so dreadful, it's all for the best. In fact, I
            believe nothing better could have happened.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, why could nothing better have happened?”</span>
            cried Lise, looking with great surprise at Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Because if he had taken the money, in an hour after
            getting home, he would be crying with mortification, that's just
            what would have happened. And most likely he would have come to
            me early to-morrow, and perhaps have flung the notes at me and
            trampled upon them as he did just now. But now he has gone home
            awfully proud and triumphant, though he knows he has <span class="tei tei-q">‘ruined himself.’</span> So now nothing could be
            easier than to make him accept the two hundred roubles by
            to-morrow, for he has already vindicated his honor, tossed away
            the money, and trampled it under foot.... He couldn't know when
            he did it that I should bring it to him again to-morrow, and yet
            he is in terrible need of that money. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page236">[pg 236]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg236" name="Pg236"></a> Though he is proud of himself now, yet even
            to-day he'll be thinking what a help he has lost. He will think
            of it more than ever at night, will dream of it, and by to-morrow
            morning he may be ready to run to me to ask forgiveness. It's
            just then that I'll appear. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Here, you
            are a proud man,’</span> I shall say: <span class="tei tei-q">‘you have shown it; but now take the money and
            forgive us!’</span> And then he will take it!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha was
            carried away with joy as he uttered his last words, <span class="tei tei-q">“And then he will take it!”</span> Lise clapped her
            hands.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, that's true! I understand that perfectly now.
            Ah, Alyosha, how do you know all this? So young and yet he knows
            what's in the heart.... I should never have worked it
            out.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The great thing now is to persuade him that he is on
            an equal footing with us, in spite of his taking money from
            us,”</span> Alyosha went on in his excitement, <span class="tei tei-q">“and not only on an equal, but even on a higher
            footing.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘On a higher
            footing’</span> is charming, Alexey Fyodorovitch; but go on, go
            on!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You mean there isn't such an expression as
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘on a higher footing’</span>; but that
            doesn't matter because—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no, of course it doesn't matter. Forgive me,
            Alyosha, dear.... You know, I scarcely respected you till
            now—that is I respected you but on an equal footing; but now I
            shall begin to respect you on a higher footing. Don't be angry,
            dear, at my joking,”</span> she put in at once, with strong
            feeling. <span class="tei tei-q">“I am absurd and small, but you,
            you! Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch. Isn't there in all our
            analysis—I mean your analysis ... no, better call it ours—aren't
            we showing contempt for him, for that poor man—in analyzing his
            soul like this, as it were, from above, eh? In deciding so
            certainly that he will take the money?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, Lise, it's not contempt,”</span> Alyosha
            answered, as though he had prepared himself for the question.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I was thinking of that on the way here.
            How can it be contempt when we are all like him, when we are all
            just the same as he is? For you know we are just the same, no
            better. If we are better, we should have been just the same in
            his place.... I don't know about you, Lise, but I consider that I
            have a sordid soul in many ways, and his soul is not sordid; on
            the contrary, full of fine feeling.... No, Lise, I have no
            contempt for him. Do you know, Lise, my elder told me once
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page237">[pg 237]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg237" name="Pg237"></a> to care for most
            people exactly as one would for children, and for some of them as
            one would for the sick in hospitals.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, dear, let us care for
            people as we would for the sick!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let us, Lise; I am ready. Though I am not altogether
            ready in myself. I am sometimes very impatient and at other times
            I don't see things. It's different with you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, I don't believe it! Alexey Fyodorovitch, how
            happy I am!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am so glad you say so, Lise.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alexey Fyodorovitch, you are wonderfully good, but
            you are sometimes sort of formal.... And yet you are not a bit
            formal really. Go to the door, open it gently, and see whether
            mamma is listening,”</span> said Lise, in a nervous, hurried
            whisper.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha went,
            opened the door, and reported that no one was listening.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Come here, Alexey Fyodorovitch,”</span> Lise went
            on, flushing redder and redder. <span class="tei tei-q">“Give me
            your hand—that's right. I have to make a great confession, I
            didn't write to you yesterday in joke, but in earnest,”</span>
            and she hid her eyes with her hand. It was evident that she was
            greatly ashamed of the confession.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Suddenly she
            snatched his hand and impulsively kissed it three times.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, Lise, what a good thing!”</span> cried Alyosha
            joyfully. <span class="tei tei-q">“You know, I was perfectly sure
            you were in earnest.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Sure? Upon my word!”</span> She put aside his hand,
            but did not leave go of it, blushing hotly, and laughing a little
            happy laugh. <span class="tei tei-q">“I kiss his hand and he
            says, <span class="tei tei-q">‘What a good
            thing!’</span> ”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But her
            reproach was undeserved. Alyosha, too, was greatly overcome.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I should like to please you always, Lise, but I
            don't know how to do it,”</span> he muttered, blushing too.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, dear, you are cold and rude. Do you see? He
            has chosen me as his wife and is quite settled about it. He is
            sure I was in earnest. What a thing to say! Why, that's
            impertinence—that's what it is.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, was it wrong of me to feel sure?”</span>
            Alyosha asked, laughing suddenly.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page238">[pg 238]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg238" name="Pg238"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, Alyosha, on the contrary, it was delightfully
            right,”</span> cried Lise, looking tenderly and happily at
            him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha stood
            still, holding her hand in his. Suddenly he stooped down and
            kissed her on her lips.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, what are you doing?”</span> cried Lise. Alyosha
            was terribly abashed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, forgive me if I shouldn't.... Perhaps I'm
            awfully stupid.... You said I was cold, so I kissed you.... But I
            see it was stupid.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lise laughed,
            and hid her face in her hands. <span class="tei tei-q">“And in
            that dress!”</span> she ejaculated in the midst of her mirth. But
            she suddenly ceased laughing and became serious, almost
            stern.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, we must put off kissing. We are not ready
            for that yet, and we shall have a long time to wait,”</span> she
            ended suddenly. <span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me rather why you
            who are so clever, so intellectual, so observant, choose a little
            idiot, an invalid like me? Ah, Alyosha, I am awfully happy, for I
            don't deserve you a bit.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You do, Lise. I shall be leaving the monastery
            altogether in a few days. If I go into the world, I must marry. I
            know that. <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">He</span></em> told me to marry, too. Whom
            could I marry better than you—and who would have me except you? I
            have been thinking it over. In the first place, you've known me
            from a child and you've a great many qualities I haven't. You are
            more light-hearted than I am; above all, you are more innocent
            than I am. I have been brought into contact with many, many
            things already.... Ah, you don't know, but I, too, am a
            Karamazov. What does it matter if you do laugh and make jokes,
            and at me, too? Go on laughing. I am so glad you do. You laugh
            like a little child, but you think like a martyr.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Like a martyr? How?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, Lise, your question just now: whether we
            weren't showing contempt for that poor man by dissecting his
            soul—that was the question of a sufferer.... You see, I don't
            know how to express it, but any one who thinks of such questions
            is capable of suffering. Sitting in your invalid chair you must
            have thought over many things already.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, give me your hand. Why are you taking it
            away?”</span> murmured Lise in a failing voice, weak with
            happiness. <span class="tei tei-q">“Listen, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page239">[pg 239]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg239" name="Pg239"></a> Alyosha. What will you wear
            when you come out of the monastery? What sort of suit? Don't
            laugh, don't be angry, it's very, very important to
            me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I haven't thought about the suit, Lise; but I'll
            wear whatever you like.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I should like you to have a dark blue velvet coat, a
            white piqué waistcoat, and a soft gray felt hat.... Tell me, did
            you believe that I didn't care for you when I said I didn't mean
            what I wrote?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I didn't believe it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, you insupportable person, you are
            incorrigible.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You see, I knew that you—seemed to care for me, but
            I pretended to believe that you didn't care for me to make
            it—easier for you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That makes it worse! Worse and better than all!
            Alyosha, I am awfully fond of you. Just before you came this
            morning, I tried my fortune. I decided I would ask you for my
            letter, and if you brought it out calmly and gave it to me (as
            might have been expected from you) it would mean that you did not
            love me at all, that you felt nothing, and were simply a stupid
            boy, good for nothing, and that I am ruined. But you left the
            letter at home and that cheered me. You left it behind on
            purpose, so as not to give it back, because you knew I would ask
            for it? That was it, wasn't it?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, Lise, it was not so a bit. The letter is with me
            now, and it was this morning, in this pocket. Here it
            is.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha pulled
            the letter out laughing, and showed it her at a distance.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I am not going to give it to you. Look at it
            from here.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, then you told a lie? You, a monk, told a
            lie!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I told a lie if you like,”</span> Alyosha laughed,
            too. <span class="tei tei-q">“I told a lie so as not to give you
            back the letter. It's very precious to me,”</span> he added
            suddenly, with strong feeling, and again he flushed. <span class="tei tei-q">“It always will be, and I won't give it up to any
            one!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lise looked at
            him joyfully. <span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha,”</span> she
            murmured again, <span class="tei tei-q">“look at the door. Isn't
            mamma listening?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Very well, Lise, I'll look; but wouldn't it be
            better not to look? Why suspect your mother of such
            meanness?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What meanness? As for her spying on her daughter,
            it's her <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page240">[pg
            240]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg240" name="Pg240"></a>
            right, it's not meanness!”</span> cried Lise, firing up.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“You may be sure, Alexey Fyodorovitch,
            that when I am a mother, if I have a daughter like myself I shall
            certainly spy on her!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Really, Lise? That's not right.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, my goodness! What has meanness to do with it? If
            she were listening to some ordinary worldly conversation, it
            would be meanness, but when her own daughter is shut up with a
            young man.... Listen, Alyosha, do you know I shall spy upon you
            as soon as we are married, and let me tell you I shall open all
            your letters and read them, so you may as well be
            prepared.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, of course, if so—”</span> muttered Alyosha,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“only it's not right.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, how contemptuous! Alyosha, dear, we won't
            quarrel the very first day. I'd better tell you the whole truth.
            Of course, it's very wrong to spy on people, and, of course, I am
            not right and you are, only I shall spy on you all the
            same.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do, then; you won't find out anything,”</span>
            laughed Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And, Alyosha, will you give in to me? We must decide
            that too.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I shall be delighted to, Lise, and certain to, only
            not in the most important things. Even if you don't agree with
            me, I shall do my duty in the most important things.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's right; but let me tell you I am ready to give
            in to you not only in the most important matters, but in
            everything. And I am ready to vow to do so now—in everything, and
            for all my life!”</span> cried Lise fervently, <span class="tei tei-q">“and I'll do it gladly, gladly! What's more, I'll
            swear never to spy on you, never once, never to read one of your
            letters. For you are right and I am not. And though I shall be
            awfully tempted to spy, I know that I won't do it since you
            consider it dishonorable. You are my conscience now.... Listen,
            Alexey Fyodorovitch, why have you been so sad lately—both
            yesterday and to-day? I know you have a lot of anxiety and
            trouble, but I see you have some special grief besides, some
            secret one, perhaps?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, Lise, I have a secret one, too,”</span>
            answered Alyosha mournfully. <span class="tei tei-q">“I see you
            love me, since you guessed that.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What grief? What about? Can you tell me?”</span>
            asked Lise with timid entreaty.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page241">[pg 241]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg241" name="Pg241"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'll tell you later, Lise—afterwards,”</span> said
            Alyosha, confused. <span class="tei tei-q">“Now you wouldn't
            understand it perhaps—and perhaps I couldn't explain
            it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I know your brothers and your father are worrying
            you, too.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, my brothers too,”</span> murmured Alyosha,
            pondering.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't like your brother Ivan, Alyosha,”</span>
            said Lise suddenly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He noticed
            this remark with some surprise, but did not answer it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“My brothers are destroying themselves,”</span> he
            went on, <span class="tei tei-q">“my father, too. And they are
            destroying others with them. It's <span class="tei tei-q">‘the
            primitive force of the Karamazovs,’</span> as Father Païssy said
            the other day, a crude, unbridled, earthly force. Does the spirit
            of God move above that force? Even that I don't know. I only know
            that I, too, am a Karamazov.... Me a monk, a monk! Am I a monk,
            Lise? You said just now that I was.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, I did.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And perhaps I don't even believe in God.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You don't believe? What is the matter?”</span> said
            Lise quietly and gently. But Alyosha did not answer. There was
            something too mysterious, too subjective in these last words of
            his, perhaps obscure to himself, but yet torturing him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And now on the top of it all, my friend, the best
            man in the world, is going, is leaving the earth! If you knew,
            Lise, how bound up in soul I am with him! And then I shall be
            left alone.... I shall come to you, Lise.... For the future we
            will be together.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, together, together! Henceforward we shall be
            always together, all our lives! Listen, kiss me, I allow
            you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha kissed
            her.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Come, now go. Christ be with you!”</span> and she
            made the sign of the cross over him. <span class="tei tei-q">“Make haste back to <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">him</span></em>
            while he is alive. I see I've kept you cruelly. I'll pray to-day
            for him and you. Alyosha, we shall be happy! Shall we be happy,
            shall we?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I believe we shall, Lise.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha
            thought it better not to go in to Madame Hohlakov and was going
            out of the house without saying good-by to her. But no sooner had
            he opened the door than he found Madame Hohlakov standing before
            him. From the first word Alyosha guessed that she had been
            waiting on purpose to meet him.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page242">[pg 242]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg242" name="Pg242"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alexey Fyodorovitch, this is awful. This is all
            childish nonsense and ridiculous. I trust you won't dream—It's
            foolishness, nothing but foolishness!”</span> she said, attacking
            him at once.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Only don't tell her that,”</span> said Alyosha,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“or she will be upset, and that's bad for
            her now.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Sensible advice from a sensible young man. Am I to
            understand that you only agreed with her from compassion for her
            invalid state, because you didn't want to irritate her by
            contradiction?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no, not at all. I was quite serious in what I
            said,”</span> Alyosha declared stoutly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To be serious about it is impossible, unthinkable,
            and in the first place I shall never be at home to you again, and
            I shall take her away, you may be sure of that.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But why?”</span> asked Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's all so far off. We may have to wait another
            year and a half.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, that's true, of course, and
            you'll have time to quarrel and separate a thousand times in a
            year and a half. But I am so unhappy! Though it's such nonsense,
            it's a great blow to me. I feel like Famusov in the last scene of
            <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sorrow
            from Wit</span></span>. You are Tchatsky and she is Sofya, and,
            only fancy, I've run down to meet you on the stairs, and in the
            play the fatal scene takes place on the staircase. I heard it
            all; I almost dropped. So this is the explanation of her dreadful
            night and her hysterics of late! It means love to the daughter
            but death to the mother. I might as well be in my grave at once.
            And a more serious matter still, what is this letter she has
            written? Show it me at once, at once!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, there's no need. Tell me, how is Katerina
            Ivanovna now? I must know.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She still lies in delirium; she has not regained
            consciousness. Her aunts are here; but they do nothing but sigh
            and give themselves airs. Herzenstube came, and he was so alarmed
            that I didn't know what to do for him. I nearly sent for a doctor
            to look after him. He was driven home in my carriage. And on the
            top of it all, you and this letter! It's true nothing can happen
            for a year and a half. In the name of all that's holy, in the
            name of your dying elder, show me that letter, Alexey
            Fyodorovitch. I'm her mother. Hold it in your hand, if you like,
            and I will read it so.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I won't show it to you. Even if she sanctioned
            it, I <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page243">[pg
            243]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg243" name="Pg243"></a>
            wouldn't. I am coming to-morrow, and if you like, we can talk
            over many things, but now good-by!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And Alyosha
            ran downstairs and into the street.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em">
<a id="toc79" name="toc79"></a> <a id="pdf80" name="pdf80"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
