<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="book-4-1" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-4-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
					<h2 epub:type="title">
						<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">Precocity</span>
					</h2>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you think the doctor will say to him?”</span> Kolya asked quickly. <span class="tei tei-q">“What a repulsive mug, though, hasn't he? I can't endure medicine!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Ilusha is dying. I think that's certain,”</span> answered Alyosha, mournfully.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“They are rogues! Medicine's a fraud! I am glad to have made your acquaintance, though, Karamazov. I wanted to know you for a long time. I am only sorry we meet in such sad circumstances.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Kolya had a great inclination to say something even warmer and more demonstrative, but he felt ill at ease. Alyosha noticed this, smiled, and pressed his hand.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I've long learned to respect you as a rare person,”</span> Kolya muttered again, faltering and uncertain. <span class="tei tei-q">“I have heard you are a mystic and have been in the monastery. I know you are a mystic, but ... that hasn't put me off. Contact with real life will cure you.... It's always so with characters like yours.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean by mystic? Cure me of what?”</span> Alyosha was rather astonished.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, God and all the rest of it.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What, don't you believe in God?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, I've nothing against God. Of course, God is only a hypothesis, but ... I admit that He is needed ... for the order of the universe and all that ... and that if there were no God He would have to be invented,”</span> added Kolya, beginning to blush. He suddenly fancied that Alyosha might think he was trying to show off his knowledge and to prove that he was <span class="tei tei-q">“grown up.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“I haven't the slightest desire to show off my knowledge to him,”</span> Kolya thought indignantly. And all of a sudden he felt horribly annoyed.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I must confess I can't endure entering on such discussions,”</span> he said with a final air. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's possible for one who doesn't believe in God to love mankind, don't you think so? Voltaire didn't believe in God and loved mankind?”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“I am at it again,”</span> he thought to himself.)</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Voltaire believed in God, though not very much, I think, and I don't think he loved mankind very much either,”</span> said Alyosha quietly, gently, and quite naturally, as though he were talking to some one of his own age, or even older. Kolya was particularly struck by Alyosha's apparent diffidence about his opinion of Voltaire. He seemed to be leaving the question for him, little Kolya, to settle.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Have you read Voltaire?”</span> Alyosha finished.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No, not to say read.... But I've read <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Candide</span></span> in the Russian translation ... in an absurd, grotesque, old translation ... (At it again! again!)”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And did you understand it?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, yes, everything.... That is ... Why do you suppose I shouldn't understand it? There's a lot of nastiness in it, of course.... Of course I can understand that it's a philosophical novel and written to advocate an idea....”</span> Kolya was getting mixed by now. <span class="tei tei-q">“I am a Socialist, Karamazov, I am an incurable Socialist,”</span> he announced suddenly, apropos of nothing.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“A Socialist?”</span> laughed Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“But when have you had time to become one? Why, I thought you were only thirteen?”</span></p>
					<p>Kolya winced.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“In the first place I am not thirteen, but fourteen, fourteen in a fortnight,”</span> he flushed angrily, <span class="tei tei-q">“and in the second place I am at a complete loss to understand what my age has to do with it? The question is what are my convictions, not what is my age, isn't it?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“When you are older, you'll understand for yourself the influence of age on convictions. I fancied, too, that you were not expressing your own ideas,”</span> Alyosha answered serenely and modestly, but Kolya interrupted him hotly:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Come, you want obedience and mysticism. You must admit that the Christian religion, for instance, has only been of use to the rich and the powerful to keep the lower classes in slavery. That's so, isn't it?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, I know where you read that, and I am sure some one told you so!”</span> cried Alyosha.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I say, what makes you think I read it? And certainly no one told me so. I can think for myself.... I am not opposed to Christ, if you like. He was a most humane person, and if He were alive to-day, He would be found in the ranks of the revolutionists, and would perhaps play a conspicuous part.... There's no doubt about that.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, where, where did you get that from? What fool have you made friends with?”</span> exclaimed Alyosha.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Come, the truth will out! It has so chanced that I have often talked to Mr. Rakitin, of course, but ... old Byelinsky said that, too, so they say.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Byelinsky? I don't remember. He hasn't written that anywhere.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“If he didn't write it, they say he said it. I heard that from a ... but never mind.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And have you read Byelinsky?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Well, no ... I haven't read all of him, but ... I read the passage about Tatyana, why she didn't go off with Onyegin.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Didn't go off with Onyegin? Surely you don't ... understand that already?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, you seem to take me for little Smurov,”</span> said Kolya, with a grin of irritation. <span class="tei tei-q">“But please don't suppose I am such a revolutionist. I often disagree with Mr. Rakitin. Though I mention Tatyana, I am not at all for the emancipation of women. I acknowledge that women are a subject race and must obey. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les femmes tricottent</span></span>, as Napoleon said.”</span> Kolya, for some reason, smiled, <span class="tei tei-q">“And on that question at least I am quite of one mind with that pseudo-great man. I think, too, that to leave one's own country and fly to America is mean, worse than mean—silly. Why go to America when one may be of great service to humanity here? Now especially. There's a perfect mass of fruitful activity open to us. That's what I answered.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean? Answered whom? Has some one suggested your going to America already?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I must own, they've been at me to go, but I declined. That's between ourselves, of course, Karamazov; do you hear, not a word to any one. I say this only to you. I am not at all anxious to fall into the clutches of the secret police and take lessons at the Chain bridge.</span>
					</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Long will you remember</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The house at the Chain bridge.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">Do you remember? It's splendid. Why are you laughing? You don't suppose I am fibbing, do you?”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“What if he should find out that I've only that one number of <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Bell</span></span> in father's bookcase, and haven't read any more of it?”</span> Kolya thought with a shudder.)</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no, I am not laughing and don't suppose for a moment that you are lying. No, indeed, I can't suppose so, for all this, alas! is perfectly true. But tell me, have you read Pushkin—<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Onyegin</span></span>, for instance?... You spoke just now of Tatyana.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No, I haven't read it yet, but I want to read it. I have no prejudices, Karamazov; I want to hear both sides. What makes you ask?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, nothing.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me, Karamazov, have you an awful contempt for me?”</span> Kolya rapped out suddenly and drew himself up before Alyosha, as though he were on drill. <span class="tei tei-q">“Be so kind as to tell me, without beating about the bush.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I have a contempt for you?”</span> Alyosha looked at him wondering. <span class="tei tei-q">“What for? I am only sad that a charming nature such as yours should be perverted by all this crude nonsense before you have begun life.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't be anxious about my nature,”</span> Kolya interrupted, not without complacency. <span class="tei tei-q">“But it's true that I am stupidly sensitive, crudely sensitive. You smiled just now, and I fancied you seemed to—”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, my smile meant something quite different. I'll tell you why I smiled. Not long ago I read the criticism made by a German who had lived in Russia, on our students and schoolboys of to-day. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Show a Russian schoolboy,’</span> he writes, <span class="tei tei-q">‘a map of the stars, which he knows nothing about, and he will give you back the map next day with corrections on it.’</span> No knowledge and unbounded conceit—that's what the German meant to say about the Russian schoolboy.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, that's perfectly right,”</span> Kolya laughed suddenly, <span class="tei tei-q">“exactly so! Bravo the German! But he did not see the good side, what do you think? Conceit may be, that comes from youth, that will be corrected if need be, but, on the other hand, there is an independent spirit almost from childhood, boldness of thought and conviction, and not the spirit of these sausage makers, groveling before authority.... But the German was right all the same. Bravo the German! But Germans want strangling all the same. Though they are so good at science and learning they must be strangled.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Strangled, what for?”</span> smiled Alyosha.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Well, perhaps I am talking nonsense, I agree. I am awfully childish sometimes, and when I am pleased about anything I can't restrain myself and am ready to talk any stuff. But, I say, we are chattering away here about nothing, and that doctor has been a long time in there. But perhaps he's examining the mamma and that poor crippled Nina. I liked that Nina, you know. She whispered to me suddenly as I was coming away, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why didn't you come before?’</span> And in such a voice, so reproachfully! I think she is awfully nice and pathetic.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, yes! Well, you'll be coming often, you will see what she is like. It would do you a great deal of good to know people like that, to learn to value a great deal which you will find out from knowing these people,”</span> Alyosha observed warmly. <span class="tei tei-q">“That would have more effect on you than anything.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, how I regret and blame myself for not having come sooner!”</span> Kolya exclaimed, with bitter feeling.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, it's a great pity. You saw for yourself how delighted the poor child was to see you. And how he fretted for you to come!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Don't tell me! You make it worse! But it serves me right. What kept me from coming was my conceit, my egoistic vanity, and the beastly wilfullness, which I never can get rid of, though I've been struggling with it all my life. I see that now. I am a beast in lots of ways, Karamazov!”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“No, you have a charming nature, though it's been distorted, and I quite understand why you have had such an influence on this generous, morbidly sensitive boy,”</span> Alyosha answered warmly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And you say that to me!”</span> cried Kolya; <span class="tei tei-q">“and would you believe it, I thought—I've thought several times since I've been here—that you despised me! If only you knew how I prize your opinion!”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“But are you really so sensitive? At your age! Would you believe it, just now, when you were telling your story, I thought, as I watched you, that you must be very sensitive!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You thought so? What an eye you've got, I say! I bet that was when I was talking about the goose. That was just when I was fancying you had a great contempt for me for being in such a hurry to show off, and for a moment I quite hated you for it, and began talking like a fool. Then I fancied—just now, here—when I said that if there were no God He would have to be invented, that I was in too great a hurry to display my knowledge, especially as I got that phrase out of a book. But I swear I wasn't showing off out of vanity, though I really don't know why. Because I was so pleased? Yes, I believe it was because I was so pleased ... though it's perfectly disgraceful for any one to be gushing directly they are pleased, I know that. But I am convinced now that you don't despise me; it was all my imagination. Oh, Karamazov, I am profoundly unhappy. I sometimes fancy all sorts of things, that every one is laughing at me, the whole world, and then I feel ready to overturn the whole order of things.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And you worry every one about you,”</span> smiled Alyosha.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, I worry every one about me, especially my mother. Karamazov, tell me, am I very ridiculous now?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't think about that, don't think of it at all!”</span> cried Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“And what does ridiculous mean? Isn't every one constantly being or seeming ridiculous? Besides, nearly all clever people now are fearfully afraid of being ridiculous, and that makes them unhappy. All I am surprised at is that you should be feeling that so early, though I've observed it for some time past, and not only in you. Nowadays the very children have begun to suffer from it. It's almost a sort of insanity. The devil has taken the form of that vanity and entered into the whole generation; it's simply the devil,”</span> added Alyosha, without a trace of the smile that Kolya, staring at him, expected to see. <span class="tei tei-q">“You are like every one else,”</span> said Alyosha, in conclusion, <span class="tei tei-q">“that is, like very many others. Only you must not be like everybody else, that's all.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Even if every one is like that?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, even if every one is like that. You be the only one not like it. You really are not like every one else, here you are not ashamed to confess to something bad and even ridiculous. And who will admit so much in these days? No one. And people have even ceased to feel the impulse to self-criticism. Don't be like every one else, even if you are the only one.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Splendid! I was not mistaken in you. You know how to console one. Oh, how I have longed to know you, Karamazov! I've long been eager for this meeting. Can you really have thought about me, too? You said just now that you thought of me, too?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, I'd heard of you and had thought of you, too ... and if it's partly vanity that makes you ask, it doesn't matter.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you know, Karamazov, our talk has been like a declaration of love,”</span> said Kolya, in a bashful and melting voice. <span class="tei tei-q">“That's not ridiculous, is it?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Not at all ridiculous, and if it were, it wouldn't matter, because it's been a good thing.”</span> Alyosha smiled brightly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“But do you know, Karamazov, you must admit that you are a little ashamed yourself, now.... I see it by your eyes.”</span> Kolya smiled with a sort of sly happiness.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Why ashamed?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Well, why are you blushing?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It was you made me blush,”</span> laughed Alyosha, and he really did blush. <span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, well, I am a little, goodness knows why, I don't know...”</span> he muttered, almost embarrassed.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, how I love you and admire you at this moment just because you are rather ashamed! Because you are just like me,”</span> cried Kolya, in positive ecstasy. His cheeks glowed, his eyes beamed.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“You know, Kolya, you will be very unhappy in your life,”</span> something made Alyosha say suddenly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I know, I know. How you know it all beforehand!”</span> Kolya agreed at once.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“But you will bless life on the whole, all the same.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Just so, hurrah! You are a prophet. Oh, we shall get on together, Karamazov! Do you know, what delights me most, is that you treat me quite like an equal. But we are not equals, no, we are not, you are better! But we shall get on. Do you know, all this last month, I've been saying to myself, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Either we shall be friends at once, for ever, or we shall part enemies to the grave!’</span> ”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And saying that, of course, you loved me,”</span> Alyosha laughed gayly.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I did. I loved you awfully. I've been loving and dreaming of you. And how do you know it all beforehand? Ah, here's the doctor. Goodness! What will he tell us? Look at his face!”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
