<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-4-2" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-4-2-3" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-top: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter III. A Little
            Demon</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Going in to
            Lise, he found her half reclining in the invalid-chair, in which
            she had been wheeled when she was unable to walk. She did not
            move to meet him, but her sharp, keen eyes were simply riveted on
            his face. There was a feverish look in her eyes, her face was
            pale and yellow. Alyosha was amazed at the change that had taken
            place in her in three days. She was positively thinner. She did
            not hold out her hand to him. He touched the thin, long fingers
            which lay motionless on her dress, then he sat down facing her,
            without a word.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I know you are in a hurry to get to the
            prison,”</span> Lise said curtly, <span class="tei tei-q">“and
            mamma's kept you there for hours; she's just been telling you
            about me and Yulia.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How do you know?”</span> asked Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I've been listening. Why do you stare at me? I want
            to listen and I do listen, there's no harm in that. I don't
            apologize.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are upset about something?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“On the contrary, I am very happy. I've only just
            been reflecting for the thirtieth time what a good thing it is I
            refused you and shall not be your wife. You are not fit to be a
            husband. If I were to marry you and give you a note to take to
            the man I loved after you, you'd take it and be sure to give it
            to him and bring an answer back, too. If you were forty, you
            would still go on taking my love-letters for me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She suddenly
            laughed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There is something spiteful and yet open-hearted
            about you,”</span> Alyosha smiled to her.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The open-heartedness consists in my not being
            ashamed of myself with you. What's more, I don't want to feel
            ashamed with you, just with you. Alyosha, why is it I don't
            respect you? I am very fond of you, but I don't respect you. If I
            respected you, I shouldn't talk to you without shame, should
            I?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page655">[pg 655]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg655" name="Pg655"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But do you believe that I am not ashamed with
            you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I don't believe it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lise laughed
            nervously again; she spoke rapidly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I sent your brother, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, some
            sweets in prison. Alyosha, you know, you are quite pretty! I
            shall love you awfully for having so quickly allowed me not to
            love you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why did you send for me to-day, Lise?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I wanted to tell you of a longing I have. I should
            like some one to torture me, marry me and then torture me,
            deceive me and go away. I don't want to be happy.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are in love with disorder?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, I want disorder. I keep wanting to set fire to
            the house. I keep imagining how I'll creep up and set fire to the
            house on the sly; it must be on the sly. They'll try to put it
            out, but it'll go on burning. And I shall know and say nothing.
            Ah, what silliness! And how bored I am!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She waved her
            hand with a look of repulsion.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's your luxurious life,”</span> said Alyosha,
            softly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Is it better, then, to be poor?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, it is better.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's what your monk taught you. That's not true.
            Let me be rich and all the rest poor, I'll eat sweets and drink
            cream and not give any to any one else. Ach, don't speak, don't
            say anything,”</span> she shook her hand at him, though Alyosha
            had not opened his mouth. <span class="tei tei-q">“You've told me
            all that before, I know it all by heart. It bores me. If I am
            ever poor, I shall murder somebody, and even if I am rich, I may
            murder some one, perhaps—why do nothing! But do you know, I
            should like to reap, cut the rye? I'll marry you, and you shall
            become a peasant, a real peasant; we'll keep a colt, shall we? Do
            you know Kalganov?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He is always wandering about, dreaming. He says,
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why live in real life? It's better to
            dream. One can dream the most delightful things, but real life is
            a bore.’</span> But he'll be married soon for all that; he's been
            making love to me already. Can you spin tops?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, he's just like a top: he wants to be wound up
            and set spinning <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page656">[pg
            656]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg656" name="Pg656"></a>
            and then to be lashed, lashed, lashed with a whip. If I marry
            him, I'll keep him spinning all his life. You are not ashamed to
            be with me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are awfully cross, because I don't talk about
            holy things. I don't want to be holy. What will they do to one in
            the next world for the greatest sin? You must know all about
            that.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“God will censure you.”</span> Alyosha was watching
            her steadily.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's just what I should like. I would go up and
            they would censure me, and I would burst out laughing in their
            faces. I should dreadfully like to set fire to the house,
            Alyosha, to our house; you still don't believe me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why? There are children of twelve years old, who
            have a longing to set fire to something and they do set things on
            fire, too. It's a sort of disease.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's not true, that's not true; there may be
            children, but that's not what I mean.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You take evil for good; it's a passing crisis, it's
            the result of your illness, perhaps.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You do despise me, though! It's simply that I don't
            want to do good, I want to do evil, and it has nothing to do with
            illness.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why do evil?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“So that everything might be destroyed. Ah, how nice
            it would be if everything were destroyed! You know, Alyosha, I
            sometimes think of doing a fearful lot of harm and everything
            bad, and I should do it for a long while on the sly and suddenly
            every one would find it out. Every one will stand round and point
            their fingers at me and I would look at them all. That would be
            awfully nice. Why would it be so nice, Alyosha?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't know. It's a craving to destroy something
            good or, as you say, to set fire to something. It happens
            sometimes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I not only say it, I shall do it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I believe you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, how I love you for saying you believe me. And
            you are not lying one little bit. But perhaps you think that I am
            saying all this on purpose to annoy you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I don't think that ... though perhaps there is a
            little desire to do that in it, too.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page657">[pg 657]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg657" name="Pg657"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There is a little. I never can tell lies to
            you,”</span> she declared, with a strange fire in her eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">What struck
            Alyosha above everything was her earnestness. There was not a
            trace of humor or jesting in her face now, though, in old days,
            fun and gayety never deserted her even at her most <span class="tei tei-q">“earnest”</span> moments.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There are moments when people love crime,”</span>
            said Alyosha thoughtfully.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, yes! You have uttered my thought; they love
            crime, every one loves crime, they love it always, not at some
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘moments.’</span> You know, it's as
            though people have made an agreement to lie about it and have
            lied about it ever since. They all declare that they hate evil,
            but secretly they all love it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And are you still reading nasty books?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, I am. Mamma reads them and hides them under her
            pillow and I steal them.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Aren't you ashamed to destroy yourself?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I want to destroy myself. There's a boy here, who
            lay down between the railway lines when the train was passing.
            Lucky fellow! Listen, your brother is being tried now for
            murdering his father and every one loves his having killed his
            father.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Loves his having killed his father?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, loves it; every one loves it! Everybody says
            it's so awful, but secretly they simply love it. I for one love
            it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There is some truth in what you say about every
            one,”</span> said Alyosha softly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, what ideas you have!”</span> Lise shrieked in
            delight. <span class="tei tei-q">“And you a monk, too! You
            wouldn't believe how I respect you, Alyosha, for never telling
            lies. Oh, I must tell you a funny dream of mine. I sometimes
            dream of devils. It's night; I am in my room with a candle and
            suddenly there are devils all over the place, in all the corners,
            under the table, and they open the doors; there's a crowd of them
            behind the doors and they want to come and seize me. And they are
            just coming, just seizing me. But I suddenly cross myself and
            they all draw back, though they don't go away altogether, they
            stand at the doors and in the corners, waiting. And suddenly I
            have a frightful longing to revile God aloud, and so I begin, and
            then they come crowding back to me, delighted, and seize me again
            and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page658">[pg 658]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg658" name="Pg658"></a> I cross myself
            again and they all draw back. It's awful fun. it takes one's
            breath away.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I've had the same dream, too,”</span> said Alyosha
            suddenly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Really?”</span> cried Lise, surprised. <span class="tei tei-q">“I say, Alyosha, don't laugh, that's awfully
            important. Could two different people have the same
            dream?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It seems they can.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, I tell you, it's awfully important,”</span>
            Lise went on, with really excessive amazement. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's not the dream that's important, but your having
            the same dream as me. You never lie to me, don't lie now: is it
            true? You are not laughing?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's true.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lise seemed
            extraordinarily impressed and for half a minute she was
            silent.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, come and see me, come and see me more
            often,”</span> she said suddenly, in a supplicating voice.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'll always come to see you, all my life,”</span>
            answered Alyosha firmly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are the only person I can talk to, you
            know,”</span> Lise began again. <span class="tei tei-q">“I talk
            to no one but myself and you. Only you in the whole world. And to
            you more readily than to myself. And I am not a bit ashamed with
            you, not a bit. Alyosha, why am I not ashamed with you, not a
            bit? Alyosha, is it true that at Easter the Jews steal a child
            and kill it?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't know.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There's a book here in which I read about the trial
            of a Jew, who took a child of four years old and cut off the
            fingers from both hands, and then crucified him on the wall,
            hammered nails into him and crucified him, and afterwards, when
            he was tried, he said that the child died soon, within four
            hours. That was <span class="tei tei-q">‘soon’</span>! He said
            the child moaned, kept on moaning and he stood admiring it.
            That's nice!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nice?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nice; I sometimes imagine that it was I who
            crucified him. He would hang there moaning and I would sit
            opposite him eating pineapple <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">compote</span></span>. I am awfully fond of
            pineapple <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">compote</span></span>. Do you like
            it?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha looked
            at her in silence. Her pale, sallow face was suddenly contorted,
            her eyes burned.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page659">[pg
            659]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg659" name="Pg659"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You know, when I read about that Jew I shook with
            sobs all night. I kept fancying how the little thing cried and
            moaned (a child of four years old understands, you know), and all
            the while the thought of pineapple <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">compote</span></span> haunted me. In the
            morning I wrote a letter to a certain person, begging him
            <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">particularly</span></em> to come and see me.
            He came and I suddenly told him all about the child and the
            pineapple <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">compote</span></span>. <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">All</span></em>
            about it, <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">all</span></em>, and said that it was nice.
            He laughed and said it really was nice. Then he got up and went
            away. He was only here five minutes. Did he despise me? Did he
            despise me? Tell me, tell me, Alyosha, did he despise me or
            not?”</span> She sat up on the couch, with flashing eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me,”</span> Alyosha asked anxiously,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“did you send for that
            person?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, I did.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Did you send him a letter?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Simply to ask about that, about that
            child?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, not about that at all. But when he came, I asked
            him about that at once. He answered, laughed, got up and went
            away.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That person behaved honorably,”</span> Alyosha
            murmured.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And did he despise me? Did he laugh at
            me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, for perhaps he believes in the pineapple
            <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">compote</span></span> himself. He is very
            ill now, too, Lise.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, he does believe in it,”</span> said Lise, with
            flashing eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He doesn't despise any one,”</span> Alyosha went on.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Only he does not believe any one. If he
            doesn't believe in people, of course, he does despise
            them.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then he despises me, me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You, too.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Good,”</span> Lise seemed to grind her teeth.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“When he went out laughing, I felt that
            it was nice to be despised. The child with fingers cut off is
            nice, and to be despised is nice....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And she
            laughed in Alyosha's face, a feverish malicious laugh.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you know, Alyosha, do you know, I should
            like—Alyosha, save me!”</span> She suddenly jumped from the
            couch, rushed to him and seized him with both hands. <span class="tei tei-q">“Save me!”</span> she almost groaned. <span class="tei tei-q">“Is there any one in the world I could tell what I've
            told you? I've told you the truth, the truth. I shall kill
            myself, because I loathe <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page660">[pg 660]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg660" name="Pg660"></a> everything! I don't want to live, because I
            loathe everything! I loathe everything, everything. Alyosha, why
            don't you love me in the least?”</span> she finished in a
            frenzy.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I do love you!”</span> answered Alyosha
            warmly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And will you weep over me, will you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Not because I won't be your wife, but simply weep
            for me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thank you! It's only your tears I want. Every one
            else may punish me and trample me under foot, every one, every
            one, not excepting <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">any one</span></em>. For I don't love any
            one. Do you hear, not any one! On the contrary, I hate him! Go,
            Alyosha; it's time you went to your brother”</span>; she tore
            herself away from him suddenly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How can I leave you like this?”</span> said Alyosha,
            almost in alarm.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Go to your brother, the prison will be shut; go,
            here's your hat. Give my love to Mitya, go, go!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And she almost
            forcibly pushed Alyosha out of the door. He looked at her with
            pained surprise, when he was suddenly aware of a letter in his
            right hand, a tiny letter folded up tight and sealed. He glanced
            at it and instantly read the address, <span class="tei tei-q">“To
            Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov.”</span> He looked quickly at Lise.
            Her face had become almost menacing.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Give it to him, you must give it to him!”</span> she
            ordered him, trembling and beside herself. <span class="tei tei-q">“To-day, at once, or I'll poison myself! That's why I
            sent for you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And she
            slammed the door quickly. The bolt clicked. Alyosha put the note
            in his pocket and went straight downstairs, without going back to
            Madame Hohlakov; forgetting her, in fact. As soon as Alyosha had
            gone, Lise unbolted the door, opened it a little, put her finger
            in the crack and slammed the door with all her might, pinching
            her finger. Ten seconds after, releasing her finger, she walked
            softly, slowly to her chair, sat up straight in it and looked
            intently at her blackened finger and at the blood that oozed from
            under the nail. Her lips were quivering and she kept whispering
            rapidly to herself:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am a wretch, wretch, wretch, wretch!”</span></p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page661">[pg 661]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg661" name="Pg661"></a>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em">
<a id="toc175" name="toc175"></a> <a id="pdf176" name="pdf176"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
