<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="epilogue" epub:type="part epilogue">
                  <section id="chapter-5-1" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-bottom: 2.88em; text-align: left; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter I. Plans For Mitya's
          Escape</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Very early, at
          nine o'clock in the morning, five days after the trial, Alyosha
          went to Katerina Ivanovna's to talk over a matter of great
          importance to both of them, and to give her a message. She sat and
          talked to him in the very room in which she had once received
          Grushenka. In the next room Ivan Fyodorovitch lay unconscious in a
          high fever. Katerina Ivanovna had immediately after the scene at
          the trial ordered the sick and unconscious man to be carried to her
          house, disregarding the inevitable gossip and general disapproval
          of the public. One of the two relations who lived with her had
          departed to Moscow immediately after the scene in court, the other
          remained. But if both had gone away, Katerina Ivanovna would have
          adhered to her resolution, and would have gone on nursing the sick
          man and sitting by him day and night. Varvinsky and Herzenstube
          were attending him. The famous doctor had gone back to Moscow,
          refusing to give an opinion as to the probable end of the illness.
          Though the doctors encouraged Katerina Ivanovna and Alyosha, it was
          evident that they could not yet give them positive hopes of
          recovery.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha came to
          see his sick brother twice a day. But this time he had specially
          urgent business, and he foresaw how difficult it would be to
          approach the subject, yet he was in great haste. He had another
          engagement that could not be put off for that same morning, and
          there was need of haste.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They had been
          talking for a quarter of an hour. Katerina Ivanovna was pale and
          terribly fatigued, yet at the same time in a state of hysterical
          excitement. She had a presentiment of the reason why Alyosha had
          come to her.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page856">[pg
          856]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg856" name="Pg856"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't worry about his decision,”</span> she said, with
          confident emphasis to Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“One way or
          another he is bound to come to it. He must escape. That unhappy
          man, that hero of honor and principle—not he, not Dmitri
          Fyodorovitch, but the man lying the other side of that door, who
          has sacrificed himself for his brother,”</span> Katya added, with
          flashing eyes—<span class="tei tei-q">“told me the whole plan of
          escape long ago. You know he has already entered into
          negotiations.... I've told you something already.... You see, it
          will probably come off at the third <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">étape</span></span> from here, when the party
          of prisoners is being taken to Siberia. Oh, it's a long way off
          yet. Ivan Fyodorovitch has already visited the superintendent of
          the third <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">étape</span></span>. But we don't know yet who
          will be in charge of the party, and it's impossible to find that
          out so long beforehand. To-morrow perhaps I will show you in detail
          the whole plan which Ivan Fyodorovitch left me on the eve of the
          trial in case of need.... That was when—do you remember?—you found
          us quarreling. He had just gone down-stairs, but seeing you I made
          him come back; do you remember? Do you know what we were quarreling
          about then?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I don't,”</span> said Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Of course he did not tell you. It was about that plan
          of escape. He had told me the main idea three days before, and we
          began quarreling about it at once and quarreled for three days. We
          quarreled because, when he told me that if Dmitri Fyodorovitch were
          convicted he would escape abroad with that creature, I felt furious
          at once—I can't tell you why, I don't know myself why.... Oh, of
          course, I was furious then about that creature, and that she, too,
          should go abroad with Dmitri!”</span> Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed
          suddenly, her lips quivering with anger. <span class="tei tei-q">“As soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch saw that I was furious
          about that woman, he instantly imagined I was jealous of Dmitri and
          that I still loved Dmitri. That is how our first quarrel began. I
          would not give an explanation, I could not ask forgiveness. I could
          not bear to think that such a man could suspect me of still loving
          that ... and when I myself had told him long before that I did not
          love Dmitri, that I loved no one but him! It was only resentment
          against that creature that made me angry with him. Three days
          later, on the evening you came, he brought me a sealed envelope,
          which I was to open at once, if anything happened to him. Oh, he
          foresaw his illness! He told me <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page857">[pg 857]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg857" name="Pg857"></a> that the envelope contained the details of
          the escape, and that if he died or was taken dangerously ill, I was
          to save Mitya alone. Then he left me money, nearly ten
          thousand—those notes to which the prosecutor referred in his
          speech, having learnt from some one that he had sent them to be
          changed. I was tremendously impressed to find that Ivan
          Fyodorovitch had not given up his idea of saving his brother, and
          was confiding this plan of escape to me, though he was still
          jealous of me and still convinced that I loved Mitya. Oh, that was
          a sacrifice! No, you cannot understand the greatness of such
          self-sacrifice, Alexey Fyodorovitch. I wanted to fall at his feet
          in reverence, but I thought at once that he would take it only for
          my joy at the thought of Mitya's being saved (and he certainly
          would have imagined that!), and I was so exasperated at the mere
          possibility of such an unjust thought on his part that I lost my
          temper again, and instead of kissing his feet, flew into a fury
          again! Oh, I am unhappy! It's my character, my awful, unhappy
          character! Oh, you will see, I shall end by driving him, too, to
          abandon me for another with whom he can get on better, like Dmitri.
          But ... no, I could not bear it, I should kill myself. And when you
          came in then, and when I called to you and told him to come back, I
          was so enraged by the look of contempt and hatred he turned on me
          that—do you remember?—I cried out to you that it was he, he alone
          who had persuaded me that his brother Dmitri was a murderer! I said
          that malicious thing on purpose to wound him again. He had never,
          never persuaded me that his brother was a murderer. On the
          contrary, it was I who persuaded him! Oh, my vile temper was the
          cause of everything! I paved the way to that hideous scene at the
          trial. He wanted to show me that he was an honorable man, and that,
          even if I loved his brother, he would not ruin him for revenge or
          jealousy. So he came to the court ... I am the cause of it all, I
          alone am to blame!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Katya never had
          made such confessions to Alyosha before, and he felt that she was
          now at that stage of unbearable suffering when even the proudest
          heart painfully crushes its pride and falls vanquished by grief.
          Oh, Alyosha knew another terrible reason of her present misery,
          though she had carefully concealed it from him during those days
          since the trial; but it would have been for some reason too painful
          to him if she had been brought so low as to speak <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page858">[pg 858]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg858" name="Pg858"></a> to him now about that. She was
          suffering for her <span class="tei tei-q">“treachery”</span> at the
          trial, and Alyosha felt that her conscience was impelling her to
          confess it to him, to him, Alyosha, with tears and cries and
          hysterical writhings on the floor. But he dreaded that moment and
          longed to spare her. It made the commission on which he had come
          even more difficult. He spoke of Mitya again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's all right, it's all right, don't be anxious about
          him!”</span> she began again, sharply and stubbornly. <span class="tei tei-q">“All that is only momentary, I know him, I know his
          heart only too well. You may be sure he will consent to escape.
          It's not as though it would be immediately; he will have time to
          make up his mind to it. Ivan Fyodorovitch will be well by that time
          and will manage it all himself, so that I shall have nothing to do
          with it. Don't be anxious; he will consent to run away. He has
          agreed already: do you suppose he would give up that creature? And
          they won't let her go to him, so he is bound to escape. It's you
          he's most afraid of, he is afraid you won't approve of his escape
          on moral grounds. But you must generously <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">allow</span></em>
          it, if your sanction is so necessary,”</span> Katya added
          viciously. She paused and smiled.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He talks about some hymn,”</span> she went on again,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“some cross he has to bear, some duty; I
          remember Ivan Fyodorovitch told me a great deal about it, and if
          you knew how he talked!”</span> Katya cried suddenly, with feeling
          she could not repress, <span class="tei tei-q">“if you knew how he
          loved that wretched man at the moment he told me, and how he hated
          him, perhaps, at the same moment. And I heard his story and his
          tears with sneering disdain. Brute! Yes, I am a brute. I am
          responsible for his fever. But that man in prison is incapable of
          suffering,”</span> Katya concluded irritably. <span class="tei tei-q">“Can such a man suffer? Men like him never
          suffer!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was a note
          of hatred and contemptuous repulsion in her words. And yet it was
          she who had betrayed him. <span class="tei tei-q">“Perhaps because
          she feels how she's wronged him she hates him at moments,”</span>
          Alyosha thought to himself. He hoped that it was only <span class="tei tei-q">“at moments.”</span> In Katya's last words he detected
          a challenging note, but he did not take it up.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I sent for you this morning to make you promise to
          persuade him yourself. Or do you, too, consider that to escape
          would be dishonorable, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page859">[pg
          859]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg859" name="Pg859"></a>
          cowardly, or something ... unchristian, perhaps?”</span> Katya
          added, even more defiantly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no. I'll tell him everything,”</span> muttered
          Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“He asks you to come and see him
          to-day,”</span> he blurted out suddenly, looking her steadily in
          the face. She started, and drew back a little from him on the
          sofa.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Me? Can that be?”</span> she faltered, turning
          pale.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It can and ought to be!”</span> Alyosha began
          emphatically, growing more animated. <span class="tei tei-q">“He
          needs you particularly just now. I would not have opened the
          subject and worried you, if it were not necessary. He is ill, he is
          beside himself, he keeps asking for you. It is not to be reconciled
          with you that he wants you, but only that you would go and show
          yourself at his door. So much has happened to him since that day.
          He realizes that he has injured you beyond all reckoning. He does
          not ask your forgiveness—<span class="tei tei-q">‘It's impossible
          to forgive me,’</span> he says himself—but only that you would show
          yourself in his doorway.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's so sudden....”</span> faltered Katya.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I've had a presentiment all these days
          that you would come with that message. I knew he would ask me to
          come. It's impossible!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let it be impossible, but do it. Only think, he
          realizes for the first time how he has wounded you, the first time
          in his life; he had never grasped it before so fully. He said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘If she refuses to come I shall be unhappy
          all my life.’</span> Do you hear? though he is condemned to penal
          servitude for twenty years, he is still planning to be happy—is not
          that piteous? Think—you must visit him; though he is ruined, he is
          innocent,”</span> broke like a challenge from Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“His hands are clean, there is no blood on them! For
          the sake of his infinite sufferings in the future visit him now.
          Go, greet him on his way into the darkness—stand at his door, that
          is all.... You ought to do it, you ought to!”</span> Alyosha
          concluded, laying immense stress on the word <span class="tei tei-q">“ought.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I ought to ... but I cannot....”</span> Katya moaned.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“He will look at me.... I
          can't.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Your eyes ought to meet. How will you live all your
          life, if you don't make up your mind to do it now?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Better suffer all my life.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page860">[pg 860]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg860" name="Pg860"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You ought to go, you ought to go,”</span> Alyosha
          repeated with merciless emphasis.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But why to-day, why at once?... I can't leave our
          patient—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You can for a moment. It will only be a moment. If you
          don't come, he will be in delirium by to-night. I would not tell
          you a lie; have pity on him!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Have pity on <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">me!</span></em>”</span> Katya said, with
          bitter reproach, and she burst into tears.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then you will come,”</span> said Alyosha firmly,
          seeing her tears. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll go and tell him you
          will come directly.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, don't tell him so on any account,”</span> cried
          Katya in alarm. <span class="tei tei-q">“I will come, but don't
          tell him beforehand, for perhaps I may go, but not go in.... I
          don't know yet—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Her voice failed
          her. She gasped for breath. Alyosha got up to go.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And what if I meet any one?”</span> she said suddenly,
          in a low voice, turning white again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's just why you must go now, to avoid meeting any
          one. There will be no one there, I can tell you that for certain.
          We will expect you,”</span> he concluded emphatically, and went out
          of the room.</p>

</section></section></body></html>
