<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-2-2" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-2-2-6" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter VI. For Awhile A Very
            Obscure One</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And Ivan, on
            parting from Alyosha, went home to Fyodor Pavlovitch's house.
            But, strange to say, he was overcome by insufferable depression,
            which grew greater at every step he took <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page292">[pg 292]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg292" name="Pg292"></a> towards the house. There was nothing
            strange in his being depressed; what was strange was that Ivan
            could not have said what was the cause of it. He had often been
            depressed before, and there was nothing surprising at his feeling
            so at such a moment, when he had broken off with everything that
            had brought him here, and was preparing that day to make a new
            start and enter upon a new, unknown future. He would again be as
            solitary as ever, and though he had great hopes, and great—too
            great—expectations from life, he could not have given any
            definite account of his hopes, his expectations, or even his
            desires.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Yet at that
            moment, though the apprehension of the new and unknown certainly
            found place in his heart, what was worrying him was something
            quite different. <span class="tei tei-q">“Is it loathing for my
            father's house?”</span> he wondered. <span class="tei tei-q">“Quite likely; I am so sick of it; and though it's
            the last time I shall cross its hateful threshold, still I loathe
            it.... No, it's not that either. Is it the parting with Alyosha
            and the conversation I had with him? For so many years I've been
            silent with the whole world and not deigned to speak, and all of
            a sudden I reel off a rigmarole like that.”</span> It certainly
            might have been the youthful vexation of youthful inexperience
            and vanity—vexation at having failed to express himself,
            especially with such a being as Alyosha, on whom his heart had
            certainly been reckoning. No doubt that came in, that vexation,
            it must have done indeed; but yet that was not it, that was not
            it either. <span class="tei tei-q">“I feel sick with depression
            and yet I can't tell what I want. Better not think,
            perhaps.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan tried
            <span class="tei tei-q">“not to think,”</span> but that, too, was
            no use. What made his depression so vexatious and irritating was
            that it had a kind of casual, external character—he felt that.
            Some person or thing seemed to be standing out somewhere, just as
            something will sometimes obtrude itself upon the eye, and though
            one may be so busy with work or conversation that for a long time
            one does not notice it, yet it irritates and almost torments one
            till at last one realizes, and removes the offending object,
            often quite a trifling and ridiculous one—some article left about
            in the wrong place, a handkerchief on the floor, a book not
            replaced on the shelf, and so on.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At last,
            feeling very cross and ill-humored, Ivan arrived home, and
            suddenly, about fifteen paces from the garden gate, he guessed
            what was fretting and worrying him.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page293">[pg 293]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg293" name="Pg293"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On a bench in
            the gateway the valet Smerdyakov was sitting enjoying the
            coolness of the evening, and at the first glance at him Ivan knew
            that the valet Smerdyakov was on his mind, and that it was this
            man that his soul loathed. It all dawned upon him suddenly and
            became clear. Just before, when Alyosha had been telling him of
            his meeting with Smerdyakov, he had felt a sudden twinge of gloom
            and loathing, which had immediately stirred responsive anger in
            his heart. Afterwards, as he talked, Smerdyakov had been
            forgotten for the time; but still he had been in his mind, and as
            soon as Ivan parted with Alyosha and was walking home, the
            forgotten sensation began to obtrude itself again. <span class="tei tei-q">“Is it possible that a miserable, contemptible
            creature like that can worry me so much?”</span> he wondered,
            with insufferable irritation.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was true
            that Ivan had come of late to feel an intense dislike for the
            man, especially during the last few days. He had even begun to
            notice in himself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for
            the creature. Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact
            that when Ivan first came to the neighborhood he had felt quite
            differently. Then he had taken a marked interest in Smerdyakov,
            and had even thought him very original. He had encouraged him to
            talk to him, although he had always wondered at a certain
            incoherence, or rather restlessness, in his mind, and could not
            understand what it was that so continually and insistently worked
            upon the brain of <span class="tei tei-q">“the
            contemplative.”</span> They discussed philosophical questions and
            even how there could have been light on the first day when the
            sun, moon, and stars were only created on the fourth day, and how
            that was to be understood. But Ivan soon saw that, though the
            sun, moon, and stars might be an interesting subject, yet that it
            was quite secondary to Smerdyakov, and that he was looking for
            something altogether different. In one way and another, he began
            to betray a boundless vanity, and a wounded vanity, too, and that
            Ivan disliked. It had first given rise to his aversion. Later on,
            there had been trouble in the house. Grushenka had come on the
            scene, and there had been the scandals with his brother
            Dmitri—they discussed that, too. But though Smerdyakov always
            talked of that with great excitement, it was impossible to
            discover what he desired to come of it. There was, in fact,
            something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some
            of his desires, accidentally <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page294">[pg 294]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg294" name="Pg294"></a> betrayed and always vaguely expressed.
            Smerdyakov was always inquiring, putting certain indirect but
            obviously premeditated questions, but what his object was he did
            not explain, and usually at the most important moment he would
            break off and relapse into silence or pass to another subject.
            But what finally irritated Ivan most and confirmed his dislike
            for him was the peculiar, revolting familiarity which Smerdyakov
            began to show more and more markedly. Not that he forgot himself
            and was rude; on the contrary, he always spoke very respectfully,
            yet he had obviously begun to consider—goodness knows why!—that
            there was some sort of understanding between him and Ivan
            Fyodorovitch. He always spoke in a tone that suggested that those
            two had some kind of compact, some secret between them, that had
            at some time been expressed on both sides, only known to them and
            beyond the comprehension of those around them. But for a long
            while Ivan did not recognize the real cause of his growing
            dislike and he had only lately realized what was at the root of
            it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">With a feeling
            of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gate without
            speaking or looking at Smerdyakov. But Smerdyakov rose from the
            bench, and from that action alone, Ivan knew instantly that he
            wanted particularly to talk to him. Ivan looked at him and
            stopped, and the fact that he did stop, instead of passing by, as
            he meant to the minute before, drove him to fury. With anger and
            repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov's emasculate, sickly face, with
            the little curls combed forward on his forehead. His left eye
            winked and he grinned as if to say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Where are you going? You won't pass by; you see that
            we two clever people have something to say to each
            other.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan shook.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Get away, miserable idiot. What have I
            to do with you?”</span> was on the tip of his tongue, but to his
            profound astonishment he heard himself say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Is my father still asleep, or has he
            waked?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He asked the
            question softly and meekly, to his own surprise, and at once,
            again to his own surprise, sat down on the bench. For an instant
            he felt almost frightened; he remembered it afterwards.
            Smerdyakov stood facing him, his hands behind his back, looking
            at him with assurance and almost severity.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“His honor is still asleep,”</span> he articulated
            deliberately (<span class="tei tei-q">“You were <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page295">[pg 295]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg295" name="Pg295"></a> the first to speak, not
            I,”</span> he seemed to say). <span class="tei tei-q">“I am
            surprised at you, sir,”</span> he added, after a pause, dropping
            his eyes affectedly, setting his right foot forward, and playing
            with the tip of his polished boot.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why are you surprised at me?”</span> Ivan asked
            abruptly and sullenly, doing his utmost to restrain himself, and
            suddenly realizing, with disgust, that he was feeling intense
            curiosity and would not, on any account, have gone away without
            satisfying it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why don't you go to Tchermashnya, sir?”</span>
            Smerdyakov suddenly raised his eyes and smiled familiarly.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Why I smile you must understand of
            yourself, if you are a clever man,”</span> his screwed-up left
            eye seemed to say.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why should I go to Tchermashnya?”</span> Ivan asked
            in surprise.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov was
            silent again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you
            to,”</span> he said at last, slowly and apparently attaching no
            significance to his answer. <span class="tei tei-q">“I put you
            off with a secondary reason,”</span> he seemed to suggest,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“simply to say something.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Damn you! Speak out what you want!”</span> Ivan
            cried angrily at last, passing from meekness to violence.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov
            drew his right foot up to his left, pulled himself up, but still
            looked at him with the same serenity and the same little
            smile.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Substantially nothing—but just by way of
            conversation.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Another
            silence followed. They did not speak for nearly a minute. Ivan
            knew that he ought to get up and show anger, and Smerdyakov stood
            before him and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he
            would be angry or not. So at least it seemed to Ivan. At last he
            moved to get up. Smerdyakov seemed to seize the moment.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'm in an awful position, Ivan Fyodorovitch. I don't
            know how to help myself,”</span> he said resolutely and
            distinctly, and at his last word he sighed. Ivan Fyodorovitch sat
            down again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They are both utterly crazy, they are no better than
            little children,”</span> Smerdyakov went on. <span class="tei tei-q">“I am speaking of your parent and your brother Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch. Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and
            begin worrying me every minute, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Has she
            come? Why hasn't she come?’</span> and so on up till midnight and
            even after midnight. And if Agrafena Alexandrovna doesn't come
            (for very likely she does not mean to come at all) then he will
            be at me <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page296">[pg
            296]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg296" name="Pg296"></a>
            again to-morrow morning, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why hasn't she
            come? When will she come?’</span>—as though I were to blame for
            it. On the other side it's no better. As soon as it gets dark, or
            even before, your brother will appear with his gun in his hands:
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Look out, you rogue, you soup-maker. If
            you miss her and don't let me know she's been—I'll kill you
            before any one.’</span> When the night's over, in the morning,
            he, too, like Fyodor Pavlovitch, begins worrying me to death.
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why hasn't she come? Will she come
            soon?’</span> And he, too, thinks me to blame because his lady
            hasn't come. And every day and every hour they get angrier and
            angrier, so that I sometimes think I shall kill myself in a
            fright. I can't depend upon them, sir.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And why have you meddled? Why did you begin to spy
            for Dmitri Fyodorovitch?”</span> said Ivan irritably.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How could I help meddling? Though, indeed, I haven't
            meddled at all, if you want to know the truth of the matter. I
            kept quiet from the very beginning, not daring to answer; but he
            pitched on me to be his servant. He has had only one thing to say
            since: <span class="tei tei-q">‘I'll kill you, you scoundrel, if
            you miss her,’</span> I feel certain, sir, that I shall have a
            long fit to-morrow.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean by <span class="tei tei-q">‘a long
            fit’</span>?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“A long fit, lasting a long time—several hours, or
            perhaps a day or two. Once it went on for three days. I fell from
            the garret that time. The struggling ceased and then began again,
            and for three days I couldn't come back to my senses. Fyodor
            Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube, the doctor here, and he put ice
            on my head and tried another remedy, too.... I might have
            died.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But they say one can't tell with epilepsy when a fit
            is coming. What makes you say you will have one
            to-morrow?”</span> Ivan inquired, with a peculiar, irritable
            curiosity.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's just so. You can't tell
            beforehand.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Besides, you fell from the garret then.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I climb up to the garret every day. I might fall
            from the garret again to-morrow. And, if not, I might fall down
            the cellar steps. I have to go into the cellar every day,
            too.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan took a
            long look at him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are talking nonsense, I see, and I don't quite
            understand you,”</span> he said softly, but with a sort of
            menace. <span class="tei tei-q">“Do you mean to pretend to be ill
            to-morrow for three days, eh?”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page297">[pg 297]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg297" name="Pg297"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov,
            who was looking at the ground again, and playing with the toe of
            his right foot, set the foot down, moved the left one forward,
            and, grinning, articulated:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If I were able to play such a trick, that is,
            pretend to have a fit—and it would not be difficult for a man
            accustomed to them—I should have a perfect right to use such a
            means to save myself from death. For even if Agrafena
            Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill, his honor
            can't blame a sick man for not telling him. He'd be ashamed
            to.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Hang it all!”</span> Ivan cried, his face working
            with anger, <span class="tei tei-q">“why are you always in such a
            funk for your life? All my brother Dmitri's threats are only
            hasty words and mean nothing. He won't kill you; it's not you
            he'll kill!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He'd kill me first of all, like a fly. But even more
            than that, I am afraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his
            when he does something crazy to his father.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why should you be taken for an
            accomplice?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They'll think I am an accomplice, because I let him
            know the signals as a great secret.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What signals? Whom did you tell? Confound you, speak
            more plainly.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'm bound to admit the fact,”</span> Smerdyakov
            drawled with pedantic composure, <span class="tei tei-q">“that I
            have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business. As you
            know yourself (if only you do know it) he has for several days
            past locked himself in as soon as night or even evening comes on.
            Of late you've been going upstairs to your room early every
            evening, and yesterday you did not come down at all, and so
            perhaps you don't know how carefully he has begun to lock himself
            in at night, and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to the door
            he won't open to him till he hears his voice. But Grigory
            Vassilyevitch does not come, because I wait upon him alone in his
            room now. That's the arrangement he made himself ever since this
            to-do with Agrafena Alexandrovna began. But at night, by his
            orders, I go away to the lodge so that I don't get to sleep till
            midnight, but am on the watch, getting up and walking about the
            yard, waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna to come. For the last few
            days he's been perfectly frantic expecting her. What he argues
            is, she is afraid of him, Dmitri Fyodorovitch (Mitya, as he calls
            him), <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page298">[pg
            298]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg298" name="Pg298"></a>
<span class="tei tei-q">‘and so,’</span> says he, <span class="tei tei-q">‘she'll come the back-way, late at night, to me. You
            look out for her,’</span> says he, <span class="tei tei-q">‘till
            midnight and later; and if she does come, you run up and knock at
            my door or at the window from the garden. Knock at first twice,
            rather gently, and then three times more quickly, then,’</span>
            says he, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I shall understand at once that
            she has come, and will open the door to you quietly.’</span>
            Another signal he gave me in case anything unexpected happens. At
            first, two knocks, and then, after an interval, another much
            louder. Then he will understand that something has happened
            suddenly and that I must see him, and he will open to me so that
            I can go and speak to him. That's all in case Agrafena
            Alexandrovna can't come herself, but sends a message. Besides,
            Dmitri Fyodorovitch might come, too, so I must let him know he is
            near. His honor is awfully afraid of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, so that
            even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and were locked in with
            him, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere near at the
            time, I should be bound to let him know at once, knocking three
            times. So that the first signal of five knocks means Agrafena
            Alexandrovna has come, while the second signal of three knocks
            means <span class="tei tei-q">‘something important to tell
            you.’</span> His honor has shown me them several times and
            explained them. And as in the whole universe no one knows of
            these signals but myself and his honor, so he'd open the door
            without the slightest hesitation and without calling out (he is
            awfully afraid of calling out aloud). Well, those signals are
            known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch too, now.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How are they known? Did you tell him? How dared you
            tell him?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It was through fright I did it. How could I dare to
            keep it back from him? Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every
            day, <span class="tei tei-q">‘You are deceiving me, you are
            hiding something from me! I'll break both your legs for
            you.’</span> So I told him those secret signals that he might see
            my slavish devotion, and might be satisfied that I was not
            deceiving him, but was telling him all I could.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If you think that he'll make use of those signals
            and try to get in, don't let him in.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But if I should be laid up with a fit, how can I
            prevent him coming in then, even if I dared prevent him, knowing
            how desperate he is?”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page299">[pg 299]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg299" name="Pg299"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Hang it! How can you be so sure you are going to
            have a fit, confound you? Are you laughing at me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How could I dare laugh at you? I am in no laughing
            humor with this fear on me. I feel I am going to have a fit. I
            have a presentiment. Fright alone will bring it on.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Confound it! If you are laid up, Grigory will be on
            the watch. Let Grigory know beforehand; he will be sure not to
            let him in.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch
            about the signals without orders from my master. And as for
            Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing him and not admitting him, he has
            been ill ever since yesterday, and Marfa Ignatyevna intends to
            give him medicine to-morrow. They've just arranged it. It's a
            very strange remedy of hers. Marfa Ignatyevna knows of a
            preparation and always keeps it. It's a strong thing made from
            some herb. She has the secret of it, and she always gives it to
            Grigory Vassilyevitch three times a year when his lumbago's so
            bad he is almost paralyzed by it. Then she takes a towel, wets it
            with the stuff, and rubs his whole back for half an hour till
            it's quite red and swollen, and what's left in the bottle she
            gives him to drink with a special prayer; but not quite all, for
            on such occasions she leaves some for herself, and drinks it
            herself. And as they never take strong drink, I assure you they
            both drop asleep at once and sleep sound a very long time. And
            when Grigory Vassilyevitch wakes up he is perfectly well after
            it, but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a headache from it. So, if
            Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to-morrow, they won't
            hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch. They'll be
            asleep.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What a rigmarole! And it all seems to happen at
            once, as though it were planned. You'll have a fit and they'll
            both be unconscious,”</span> cried Ivan. <span class="tei tei-q">“But aren't you trying to arrange it so?”</span>
            broke from him suddenly, and he frowned threateningly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How could I?... And why should I, when it all
            depends on Dmitri Fyodorovitch and his plans?... If he means to
            do anything, he'll do it; but if not, I shan't be thrusting him
            upon his father.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And why should he go to father, especially on the
            sly, if, as you say yourself, Agrafena Alexandrovna won't come at
            all?”</span> Ivan went on, turning white with anger. <span class="tei tei-q">“You say that yourself, and all the while I've been
            here, I've felt sure it was all the old man's fancy, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page300">[pg 300]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg300" name="Pg300"></a> and the creature won't come
            to him. Why should Dmitri break in on him if she doesn't come?
            Speak, I want to know what you are thinking!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You know yourself why he'll come. What's the use of
            what I think? His honor will come simply because he is in a rage
            or suspicious on account of my illness perhaps, and he'll dash
            in, as he did yesterday through impatience to search the rooms,
            to see whether she hasn't escaped him on the sly. He is perfectly
            well aware, too, that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a big envelope with
            three thousand roubles in it, tied up with ribbon and sealed with
            three seals. On it is written in his own hand, <span class="tei tei-q">‘To my angel Grushenka, if she will come,’</span> to
            which he added three days later, <span class="tei tei-q">‘for my
            little chicken.’</span> There's no knowing what that might
            do.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nonsense!”</span> cried Ivan, almost beside himself.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Dmitri won't come to steal money and
            kill my father to do it. He might have killed him yesterday on
            account of Grushenka, like the frantic, savage fool he is, but he
            won't steal.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He is in very great need of money now—the greatest
            need, Ivan Fyodorovitch. You don't know in what need he
            is,”</span> Smerdyakov explained, with perfect composure and
            remarkable distinctness. <span class="tei tei-q">“He looks on
            that three thousand as his own, too. He said so to me himself.
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘My father still owes me just three
            thousand,’</span> he said. And besides that, consider, Ivan
            Fyodorovitch, there is something else perfectly true. It's as
            good as certain, so to say, that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force
            him, if only she cares to, to marry her—the master himself, I
            mean, Fyodor Pavlovitch—if only she cares to, and of course she
            may care to. All I've said is that she won't come, but maybe
            she's looking for more than that—I mean to be mistress here. I
            know myself that Samsonov, her merchant, was laughing with her
            about it, telling her quite openly that it would not be at all a
            stupid thing to do. And she's got plenty of sense. She wouldn't
            marry a beggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch. So, taking that into
            consideration, Ivan Fyodorovitch, reflect that then neither
            Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself and your brother, Alexey
            Fyodorovitch, would have anything after the master's death, not a
            rouble, for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him simply to get
            hold of the whole, all the money there is. But if your father
            were to die now, there'd be some forty thousand for sure, even
            for Dmitri Fyodorovitch <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page301">[pg
            301]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg301" name="Pg301"></a>
            whom he hates so, for he's made no will.... Dmitri Fyodorovitch
            knows all that very well.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A sort of
            shudder passed over Ivan's face. He suddenly flushed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then why on earth,”</span> he suddenly interrupted
            Smerdyakov, <span class="tei tei-q">“do you advise me to go to
            Tchermashnya? What did you mean by that? If I go away, you see
            what will happen here.”</span> Ivan drew his breath with
            difficulty.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Precisely so,”</span> said Smerdyakov, softly and
            reasonably, watching Ivan intently, however.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean by <span class="tei tei-q">‘precisely so’</span>?”</span> Ivan questioned him,
            with a menacing light in his eyes, restraining himself with
            difficulty.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I spoke because I felt sorry for you. If I were in
            your place I should simply throw it all up ... rather than stay
            on in such a position,”</span> answered Smerdyakov, with the most
            candid air looking at Ivan's flashing eyes. They were both
            silent.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You seem to be a perfect idiot, and what's more ...
            an awful scoundrel, too.”</span> Ivan rose suddenly from the
            bench. He was about to pass straight through the gate, but he
            stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov. Something strange
            followed. Ivan, in a sudden paroxysm, bit his lip, clenched his
            fists, and, in another minute, would have flung himself on
            Smerdyakov. The latter, anyway, noticed it at the same moment,
            started, and shrank back. But the moment passed without mischief
            to Smerdyakov, and Ivan turned in silence, as it seemed in
            perplexity, to the gate.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am going away to Moscow to-morrow, if you care to
            know—early to-morrow morning. That's all!”</span> he suddenly
            said aloud angrily, and wondered himself afterwards what need
            there was to say this then to Smerdyakov.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's the best thing you can do,”</span> he
            responded, as though he had expected to hear it; <span class="tei tei-q">“except that you can always be telegraphed for from
            Moscow, if anything should happen here.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan stopped
            again, and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov. But a change had
            passed over him, too. All his familiarity and carelessness had
            completely disappeared. His face expressed attention and
            expectation, intent but timid and cringing.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Haven't you something more to say—something to
            add?”</span> could be read in the intent gaze he fixed on
            Ivan.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page302">[pg
            302]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg302" name="Pg302"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And couldn't I be sent for from Tchermashnya, too—in
            case anything happened?”</span> Ivan shouted suddenly, for some
            unknown reason raising his voice.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“From Tchermashnya, too ... you could be sent
            for,”</span> Smerdyakov muttered, almost in a whisper, looking
            disconcerted, but gazing intently into Ivan's eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer.
            Is it to save my spending money on the fare, or to save my going
            so far out of my way, that you insist on
            Tchermashnya?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Precisely so ...”</span> muttered Smerdyakov, with a
            breaking voice. He looked at Ivan with a revolting smile, and
            again made ready to draw back. But to his astonishment Ivan broke
            into a laugh, and went through the gate still laughing. Any one
            who had seen his face at that moment would have known that he was
            not laughing from lightness of heart, and he could not have
            explained himself what he was feeling at that instant. He moved
            and walked as though in a nervous frenzy.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em">
<a id="toc89" name="toc89"></a> <a id="pdf90" name="pdf90"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
