<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-4-2" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-4-2-8" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-top: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter VIII. The Third And Last
            Interview With Smerdyakov</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When he was
            half-way there, the keen dry wind that had been blowing early
            that morning rose again, and a fine dry snow began falling
            thickly. It did not lie on the ground, but was whirled about by
            the wind, and soon there was a regular snowstorm. There were
            scarcely any lamp-posts in the part of the town where Smerdyakov
            lived. Ivan strode alone in the darkness, unconscious of the
            storm, instinctively picking out his way. His head ached and
            there was a painful throbbing in his temples. He felt that his
            hands were twitching convulsively. Not far from Marya
            Kondratyevna's cottage, Ivan suddenly came upon a solitary
            drunken little peasant. He was wearing a coarse and patched coat,
            and was walking in zigzags, grumbling and swearing to himself.
            Then suddenly he would begin singing in a husky drunken
            voice:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 90%">“</span><span style="font-size: 90%">Ach,
                  Vanka's gone to Petersburg;</span></span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left"><span style="font-size: 90%">I won't
                  wait till he comes back.</span><span style="font-size: 90%">”</span></span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But he broke
            off every time at the second line and began swearing again; then
            he would begin the same song again. Ivan felt an intense hatred
            for him before he had thought about him at all. Suddenly he
            realized his presence and felt an irresistible impulse to
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page702">[pg 702]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg702" name="Pg702"></a> knock him down. At
            that moment they met, and the peasant with a violent lurch fell
            full tilt against Ivan, who pushed him back furiously. The
            peasant went flying backwards and fell like a log on the frozen
            ground. He uttered one plaintive <span class="tei tei-q">“O—oh!”</span> and then was silent. Ivan stepped up
            to him. He was lying on his back, without movement or
            consciousness. <span class="tei tei-q">“He will be
            frozen,”</span> thought Ivan, and he went on his way to
            Smerdyakov's.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the
            passage, Marya Kondratyevna, who ran out to open the door with a
            candle in her hand, whispered that Smerdyakov was very ill,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“It's not that he's laid up, but he seems
            not himself, and he even told us to take the tea away; he
            wouldn't have any.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, does he make a row?”</span> asked Ivan
            coarsely.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, dear, no, quite the contrary, he's very quiet.
            Only please don't talk to him too long,”</span> Marya
            Kondratyevna begged him. Ivan opened the door and stepped into
            the room.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was
            over-heated as before, but there were changes in the room. One of
            the benches at the side had been removed, and in its place had
            been put a large old mahogany leather sofa, on which a bed had
            been made up, with fairly clean white pillows. Smerdyakov was
            sitting on the sofa, wearing the same dressing-gown. The table
            had been brought out in front of the sofa, so that there was
            hardly room to move. On the table lay a thick book in yellow
            cover, but Smerdyakov was not reading it. He seemed to be sitting
            doing nothing. He met Ivan with a slow silent gaze, and was
            apparently not at all surprised at his coming. There was a great
            change in his face; he was much thinner and sallower. His eyes
            were sunken and there were blue marks under them.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, you really are ill?”</span> Ivan stopped short.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I won't keep you long, I won't even take
            off my coat. Where can one sit down?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He went to the
            other end of the table, moved up a chair and sat down on it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why do you look at me without speaking? I've only
            come with one question, and I swear I won't go without an answer.
            Has the young lady, Katerina Ivanovna, been with you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov
            still remained silent, looking quietly at Ivan as before.
            Suddenly, with a motion of his hand, he turned his face away.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What's the matter with you?”</span> cried Ivan.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nothing.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page703">[pg 703]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg703" name="Pg703"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean by <span class="tei tei-q">‘nothing’</span>?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, she has. It's no matter to you. Let me
            alone.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I won't let you alone. Tell me, when was she
            here?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, I'd quite forgotten about her,”</span> said
            Smerdyakov, with a scornful smile, and turning his face to Ivan
            again, he stared at him with a look of frenzied hatred, the same
            look that he had fixed on him at their last interview, a month
            before.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You seem very ill yourself, your face is sunken; you
            don't look like yourself,”</span> he said to Ivan.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Never mind my health, tell me what I ask
            you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But why are your eyes so yellow? The whites are
            quite yellow. Are you so worried?”</span> He smiled
            contemptuously and suddenly laughed outright.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Listen; I've told you I won't go away without an
            answer!”</span> Ivan cried, intensely irritated.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why do you keep pestering me? Why do you torment
            me?”</span> said Smerdyakov, with a look of suffering.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Damn it! I've nothing to do with you. Just answer my
            question and I'll go away.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I've no answer to give you,”</span> said Smerdyakov,
            looking down again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You may be sure I'll make you answer!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why are you so uneasy?”</span> Smerdyakov stared at
            him, not simply with contempt, but almost with repulsion.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Is this because the trial begins
            to-morrow? Nothing will happen to you; can't you believe that at
            last? Go home, go to bed and sleep in peace, don't be afraid of
            anything.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't understand you.... What have I to be afraid
            of to-morrow?”</span> Ivan articulated in astonishment, and
            suddenly a chill breath of fear did in fact pass over his soul.
            Smerdyakov measured him with his eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You don't understand?”</span> he drawled
            reproachfully. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's a strange thing a
            sensible man should care to play such a farce!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan looked at
            him speechless. The startling, incredibly supercilious tone of
            this man who had once been his valet, was extraordinary in
            itself. He had not taken such a tone even at their last
            interview.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I tell you, you've nothing to be afraid of. I won't
            say anything <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page704">[pg
            704]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg704" name="Pg704"></a>
            about you; there's no proof against you. I say, how your hands
            are trembling! Why are your fingers moving like that? Go home,
            <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">you</span></em> did not murder
            him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan started.
            He remembered Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I know it was not I,”</span> he faltered.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you?”</span> Smerdyakov caught him up again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan jumped up
            and seized him by the shoulder.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me everything, you viper! Tell me
            everything!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov was
            not in the least scared. He only riveted his eyes on Ivan with
            insane hatred.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, it was you who murdered him, if that's
            it,”</span> he whispered furiously.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan sank back
            on his chair, as though pondering something. He laughed
            malignantly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You mean my going away. What you talked about last
            time?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You stood before me last time and understood it all,
            and you understand it now.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“All I understand is that you are mad.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Aren't you tired of it? Here we are face to face;
            what's the use of going on keeping up a farce to each other? Are
            you still trying to throw it all on me, to my face? <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">You</span></em>
            murdered him; you are the real murderer, I was only your
            instrument, your faithful servant, and it was following your
            words I did it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">Did</span></em> it? Why, did you murder
            him?”</span> Ivan turned cold.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Something
            seemed to give way in his brain, and he shuddered all over with a
            cold shiver. Then Smerdyakov himself looked at him wonderingly;
            probably the genuineness of Ivan's horror struck him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You don't mean to say you really did not
            know?”</span> he faltered mistrustfully, looking with a forced
            smile into his eyes. Ivan still gazed at him, and seemed unable
            to speak.</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Ach, Vanka's gone to
                  Petersburg;</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">I won't wait till he comes
                  back,</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">suddenly
            echoed in his head.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you know, I am afraid that you are a dream, a
            phantom sitting before me,”</span> he muttered.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There's no phantom here, but only us two and one
            other. No doubt he is here, that third, between
            us.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page705">[pg
            705]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg705" name="Pg705"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Who is he? Who is here? What third person?”</span>
            Ivan cried in alarm, looking about him, his eyes hastily
            searching in every corner.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That third is God Himself—Providence. He is the
            third beside us now. Only don't look for Him, you won't find
            Him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's a lie that you killed him!”</span> Ivan cried
            madly. <span class="tei tei-q">“You are mad, or teasing me
            again!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov, as
            before, watched him curiously, with no sign of fear. He could
            still scarcely get over his incredulity; he still fancied that
            Ivan knew everything and was trying to <span class="tei tei-q">“throw it all on him to his face.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Wait a minute,”</span> he said at last in a weak
            voice, and suddenly bringing up his left leg from under the
            table, he began turning up his trouser leg. He was wearing long
            white stockings and slippers. Slowly he took off his garter and
            fumbled to the bottom of his stocking. Ivan gazed at him, and
            suddenly shuddered in a paroxysm of terror.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He's mad!”</span> he cried, and rapidly jumping up,
            he drew back, so that he knocked his back against the wall and
            stood up against it, stiff and straight. He looked with insane
            terror at Smerdyakov, who, entirely unaffected by his terror,
            continued fumbling in his stocking, as though he were making an
            effort to get hold of something with his fingers and pull it out.
            At last he got hold of it and began pulling it out. Ivan saw that
            it was a piece of paper, or perhaps a roll of papers. Smerdyakov
            pulled it out and laid it on the table.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here,”</span> he said quietly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What is it?”</span> asked Ivan, trembling.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Kindly look at it,”</span> Smerdyakov answered,
            still in the same low tone.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan stepped
            up to the table, took up the roll of paper and began unfolding
            it, but suddenly he drew back his fingers, as though from contact
            with a loathsome reptile.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Your hands keep twitching,”</span> observed
            Smerdyakov, and he deliberately unfolded the bundle himself.
            Under the wrapper were three packets of hundred-rouble notes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They are all here, all the three thousand roubles;
            you need not count them. Take them,”</span> Smerdyakov suggested
            to Ivan, nodding <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page706">[pg
            706]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg706" name="Pg706"></a>
            at the notes. Ivan sank back in his chair. He was as white as a
            handkerchief.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You frightened me ... with your stocking,”</span> he
            said, with a strange grin.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Can you really not have known till now?”</span>
            Smerdyakov asked once more.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I did not know. I kept thinking of Dmitri.
            Brother, brother! Ach!”</span> He suddenly clutched his head in
            both hands.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Listen. Did you kill him alone? With my brother's
            help or without?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It was only with you, with your help, I killed him,
            and Dmitri Fyodorovitch is quite innocent.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“All right, all right. Talk about me later. Why do I
            keep on trembling? I can't speak properly.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You were bold enough then. You said <span class="tei tei-q">‘everything was lawful,’</span> and how frightened
            you are now,”</span> Smerdyakov muttered in surprise.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Won't you have some lemonade? I'll ask
            for some at once. It's very refreshing. Only I must hide this
            first.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And again he
            motioned at the notes. He was just going to get up and call at
            the door to Marya Kondratyevna to make some lemonade and bring it
            them, but, looking for something to cover up the notes that she
            might not see them, he first took out his handkerchief, and as it
            turned out to be very dirty, took up the big yellow book that
            Ivan had noticed at first lying on the table, and put it over the
            notes. The book was <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Sayings of the Holy Father Isaac the
            Syrian</span></span>. Ivan read it mechanically.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I won't have any lemonade,”</span> he said.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Talk of me later. Sit down and tell me
            how you did it. Tell me all about it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You'd better take off your greatcoat, or you'll be
            too hot.”</span> Ivan, as though he'd only just thought of it,
            took off his coat, and, without getting up from his chair, threw
            it on the bench.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Speak, please, speak.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He seemed
            calmer. He waited, feeling sure that Smerdyakov would tell him
            <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">all</span></em> about it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How it was done?”</span> sighed Smerdyakov.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“It was done in a most natural way,
            following your very words.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Of my words later,”</span> Ivan broke in again,
            apparently with complete self-possession, firmly uttering his
            words, and not shouting <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page707">[pg
            707]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg707" name="Pg707"></a>
            as before. <span class="tei tei-q">“Only tell me in detail how
            you did it. Everything, as it happened. Don't forget anything.
            The details, above everything, the details, I beg
            you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You'd gone away, then I fell into the
            cellar.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“In a fit or in a sham one?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“A sham one, naturally. I shammed it all. I went
            quietly down the steps to the very bottom and lay down quietly,
            and as I lay down I gave a scream, and struggled, till they
            carried me out.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Stay! And were you shamming all along, afterwards,
            and in the hospital?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, not at all. Next day, in the morning, before
            they took me to the hospital, I had a real attack and a more
            violent one than I've had for years. For two days I was quite
            unconscious.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“All right, all right. Go on.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They laid me on the bed. I knew I'd be the other
            side of the partition, for whenever I was ill, Marfa Ignatyevna
            used to put me there, near them. She's always been very kind to
            me, from my birth up. At night I moaned, but quietly. I kept
            expecting Dmitri Fyodorovitch to come.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Expecting him? To come to you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Not to me. I expected him to come into the house,
            for I'd no doubt that he'd come that night, for being without me
            and getting no news, he'd be sure to come and climb over the
            fence, as he used to, and do something.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And if he hadn't come?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then nothing would have happened. I should never
            have brought myself to it without him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“All right, all right ... speak more intelligibly,
            don't hurry; above all, don't leave anything out!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I expected him to kill Fyodor Pavlovitch. I thought
            that was certain, for I had prepared him for it ... during the
            last few days.... He knew about the knocks, that was the chief
            thing. With his suspiciousness and the fury which had been
            growing in him all those days, he was bound to get into the house
            by means of those taps. That was inevitable, so I was expecting
            him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Stay,”</span> Ivan interrupted; <span class="tei tei-q">“if he had killed him, he would have taken the money
            and carried it away; you must have considered that. What would
            you have got by it afterwards? I don't
            see.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page708">[pg
            708]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg708" name="Pg708"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But he would never have found the money. That was
            only what I told him, that the money was under the mattress. But
            that wasn't true. It had been lying in a box. And afterwards I
            suggested to Fyodor Pavlovitch, as I was the only person he
            trusted, to hide the envelope with the notes in the corner behind
            the ikons, for no one would have guessed that place, especially
            if they came in a hurry. So that's where the envelope lay, in the
            corner behind the ikons. It would have been absurd to keep it
            under the mattress; the box, anyway, could be locked. But all
            believe it was under the mattress. A stupid thing to believe. So
            if Dmitri Fyodorovitch had committed the murder, finding nothing,
            he would either have run away in a hurry, afraid of every sound,
            as always happens with murderers, or he would have been arrested.
            So I could always have clambered up to the ikons and have taken
            away the money next morning or even that night, and it would have
            all been put down to Dmitri Fyodorovitch. I could reckon upon
            that.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But what if he did not kill him, but only knocked
            him down?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If he did not kill him, of course, I would not have
            ventured to take the money, and nothing would have happened. But
            I calculated that he would beat him senseless, and I should have
            time to take it then, and then I'd make out to Fyodor Pavlovitch
            that it was no one but Dmitri Fyodorovitch who had taken the
            money after beating him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Stop ... I am getting mixed. Then it was Dmitri
            after all who killed him; you only took the money?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, he didn't kill him. Well, I might as well have
            told you now that he was the murderer.... But I don't want to lie
            to you now, because ... because if you really haven't understood
            till now, as I see for myself, and are not pretending, so as to
            throw your guilt on me to my very face, you are still responsible
            for it all, since you knew of the murder and charged me to do it,
            and went away knowing all about it. And so I want to prove to
            your face this evening that you are the only real murderer in the
            whole affair, and I am not the real murderer, though I did kill
            him. You are the rightful murderer.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, why, am I a murderer? Oh, God!”</span> Ivan
            cried, unable to restrain himself at last, and forgetting that he
            had put off discussing himself till the end of the conversation.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“You still mean that <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page709">[pg 709]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg709" name="Pg709"></a> Tchermashnya? Stay, tell me,
            why did you want my consent, if you really took Tchermashnya for
            consent? How will you explain that now?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Assured of your consent, I should have known that
            you wouldn't have made an outcry over those three thousand being
            lost, even if I'd been suspected, instead of Dmitri Fyodorovitch,
            or as his accomplice; on the contrary, you would have protected
            me from others.... And when you got your inheritance you would
            have rewarded me when you were able, all the rest of your life.
            For you'd have received your inheritance through me, seeing that
            if he had married Agrafena Alexandrovna, you wouldn't have had a
            farthing.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah! Then you intended to worry me all my life
            afterwards,”</span> snarled Ivan. <span class="tei tei-q">“And
            what if I hadn't gone away then, but had informed against
            you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What could you have informed? That I persuaded you
            to go to Tchermashnya? That's all nonsense. Besides, after our
            conversation you would either have gone away or have stayed. If
            you had stayed, nothing would have happened. I should have known
            that you didn't want it done, and should have attempted nothing.
            As you went away, it meant you assured me that you wouldn't dare
            to inform against me at the trial, and that you'd overlook my
            having the three thousand. And, indeed, you couldn't have
            prosecuted me afterwards, because then I should have told it all
            in the court; that is, not that I had stolen the money or killed
            him—I shouldn't have said that—but that you'd put me up to the
            theft and the murder, though I didn't consent to it. That's why I
            needed your consent, so that you couldn't have cornered me
            afterwards, for what proof could you have had? I could always
            have cornered you, revealing your eagerness for your father's
            death, and I tell you the public would have believed it all, and
            you would have been ashamed for the rest of your
            life.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Was I then so eager, was I?”</span> Ivan snarled
            again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To be sure you were, and by your consent you
            silently sanctioned my doing it.”</span> Smerdyakov looked
            resolutely at Ivan. He was very weak and spoke slowly and
            wearily, but some hidden inner force urged him on. He evidently
            had some design. Ivan felt that.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Go on,”</span> he said. <span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me what happened that
            night.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page710">[pg
            710]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg710" name="Pg710"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What more is there to tell! I lay there and I
            thought I heard the master shout. And before that Grigory
            Vassilyevitch had suddenly got up and came out, and he suddenly
            gave a scream, and then all was silence and darkness. I lay there
            waiting, my heart beating; I couldn't bear it. I got up at last,
            went out. I saw the window open on the left into the garden, and
            I stepped to the left to listen whether he was sitting there
            alive, and I heard the master moving about, sighing, so I knew he
            was alive. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Ech!’</span> I thought. I
            went to the window and shouted to the master, <span class="tei tei-q">‘It's I.’</span> And he shouted to me, <span class="tei tei-q">‘He's been, he's been; he's run away.’</span> He
            meant Dmitri Fyodorovitch had been. <span class="tei tei-q">‘He's
            killed Grigory!’</span> <span class="tei tei-q">‘Where?’</span> I
            whispered. <span class="tei tei-q">‘There, in the corner,’</span>
            he pointed. He was whispering, too. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Wait
            a bit,’</span> I said. I went to the corner of the garden to
            look, and there I came upon Grigory Vassilyevitch lying by the
            wall, covered with blood, senseless. So it's true that Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch has been here, was the thought that came into my
            head, and I determined on the spot to make an end of it, as
            Grigory Vassilyevitch, even if he were alive, would see nothing
            of it, as he lay there senseless. The only risk was that Marfa
            Ignatyevna might wake up. I felt that at the moment, but the
            longing to get it done came over me, till I could scarcely
            breathe. I went back to the window to the master and said,
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘She's here, she's come; Agrafena
            Alexandrovna has come, wants to be let in.’</span> And he started
            like a baby. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Where is she?’</span> he
            fairly gasped, but couldn't believe it. <span class="tei tei-q">‘She's standing there,’</span> said I. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Open.’</span> He looked out of the window at me,
            half believing and half distrustful, but afraid to open.
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why, he is afraid of me now,’</span> I
            thought. And it was funny. I bethought me to knock on the
            window-frame those taps we'd agreed upon as a signal that
            Grushenka had come, in his presence, before his eyes. He didn't
            seem to believe my word, but as soon as he heard the taps, he ran
            at once to open the door. He opened it. I would have gone in, but
            he stood in the way to prevent me passing. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Where is she? Where is she?’</span> He looked at me,
            all of a tremble. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Well,’</span> thought
            I, <span class="tei tei-q">‘if he's so frightened of me as all
            that, it's a bad look out!’</span> And my legs went weak with
            fright that he wouldn't let me in or would call out, or Marfa
            Ignatyevna would run up, or something else might happen. I don't
            remember now, but I must have stood pale, facing him. I whispered
            to him, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why, she's there, there, under
            the window; <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page711">[pg
            711]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg711" name="Pg711"></a>
            how is it you don't see her?’</span> I said. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Bring her then, bring her.’</span> <span class="tei tei-q">‘She's afraid,’</span> said I; <span class="tei tei-q">‘she was frightened at the noise, she's hidden in the
            bushes; go and call to her yourself from the study.’</span> He
            ran to the window, put the candle in the window. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Grushenka,’</span> he cried, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Grushenka, are you here?’</span> Though he cried
            that, he didn't want to lean out of the window, he didn't want to
            move away from me, for he was panic-stricken; he was so
            frightened he didn't dare to turn his back on me. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why, here she is,’</span> said I. I went up to the
            window and leaned right out of it. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Here
            she is; she's in the bush, laughing at you, don't you see
            her?’</span> He suddenly believed it; he was all of a shake—he
            was awfully crazy about her—and he leaned right out of the
            window. I snatched up that iron paper-weight from his table; do
            you remember, weighing about three pounds? I swung it and hit him
            on the top of the skull with the corner of it. He didn't even cry
            out. He only sank down suddenly, and I hit him again and a third
            time. And the third time I knew I'd broken his skull. He suddenly
            rolled on his back, face upwards, covered with blood. I looked
            round. There was no blood on me, not a spot. I wiped the
            paper-weight, put it back, went up to the ikons, took the money
            out of the envelope, and flung the envelope on the floor and the
            pink ribbon beside it. I went out into the garden all of a
            tremble, straight to the apple-tree with a hollow in it—you know
            that hollow. I'd marked it long before and put a rag and a piece
            of paper ready in it. I wrapped all the notes in the rag and
            stuffed it deep down in the hole. And there it stayed for over a
            fortnight. I took it out later, when I came out of the hospital.
            I went back to my bed, lay down and thought, <span class="tei tei-q">‘If Grigory Vassilyevitch has been killed outright it
            may be a bad job for me, but if he is not killed and recovers, it
            will be first-rate, for then he'll bear witness that Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch has been here, and so he must have killed him and
            taken the money.’</span> Then I began groaning with suspense and
            impatience, so as to wake Marfa Ignatyevna as soon as possible.
            At last she got up and she rushed to me, but when she saw Grigory
            Vassilyevitch was not there, she ran out, and I heard her scream
            in the garden. And that set it all going and set my mind at
            rest.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He stopped.
            Ivan had listened all the time in dead silence without stirring
            or taking his eyes off him. As he told his story Smerdyakov
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page712">[pg 712]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg712" name="Pg712"></a> glanced at him
            from time to time, but for the most part kept his eyes averted.
            When he had finished he was evidently agitated and was breathing
            hard. The perspiration stood out on his face. But it was
            impossible to tell whether it was remorse he was feeling, or
            what.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Stay,”</span> cried Ivan, pondering. <span class="tei tei-q">“What about the door? If he only opened the door to
            you, how could Grigory have seen it open before? For Grigory saw
            it before you went.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was
            remarkable that Ivan spoke quite amicably, in a different tone,
            not angry as before, so if any one had opened the door at that
            moment and peeped in at them, he would certainly have concluded
            that they were talking peaceably about some ordinary, though
            interesting, subject.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“As for that door and Grigory Vassilyevitch's having
            seen it open, that's only his fancy,”</span> said Smerdyakov,
            with a wry smile. <span class="tei tei-q">“He is not a man, I
            assure you, but an obstinate mule. He didn't see it, but fancied
            he had seen it, and there's no shaking him. It's just our luck he
            took that notion into his head, for they can't fail to convict
            Dmitri Fyodorovitch after that.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Listen ...”</span> said Ivan, beginning to seem
            bewildered again and making an effort to grasp something.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Listen. There are a lot of questions I
            want to ask you, but I forget them ... I keep forgetting and
            getting mixed up. Yes. Tell me this at least, why did you open
            the envelope and leave it there on the floor? Why didn't you
            simply carry off the envelope?... When you were telling me, I
            thought you spoke about it as though it were the right thing to
            do ... but why, I can't understand....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I did that for a good reason. For if a man had known
            all about it, as I did for instance, if he'd seen those notes
            before, and perhaps had put them in that envelope himself, and
            had seen the envelope sealed up and addressed, with his own eyes,
            if such a man had done the murder, what should have made him tear
            open the envelope afterwards, especially in such desperate haste,
            since he'd know for certain the notes must be in the envelope?
            No, if the robber had been some one like me, he'd simply have put
            the envelope straight in his pocket and got away with it as fast
            as he could. But it'd be quite different with Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch. He only knew about the envelope by hearsay; he had
            never seen it, and if he'd found it, for <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page713">[pg 713]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg713" name="Pg713"></a> instance, under the mattress, he'd have
            torn it open as quickly as possible to make sure the notes were
            in it. And he'd have thrown the envelope down, without having
            time to think that it would be evidence against him. Because he
            was not an habitual thief and had never directly stolen anything
            before, for he is a gentleman born, and if he did bring himself
            to steal, it would not be regular stealing, but simply taking
            what was his own, for he'd told the whole town he meant to
            before, and had even bragged aloud before every one that he'd go
            and take his property from Fyodor Pavlovitch. I didn't say that
            openly to the prosecutor when I was being examined, but quite the
            contrary, I brought him to it by a hint, as though I didn't see
            it myself, and as though he'd thought of it himself and I hadn't
            prompted him; so that Mr. Prosecutor's mouth positively watered
            at my suggestion.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But can you possibly have thought of all that on the
            spot?”</span> cried Ivan, overcome with astonishment. He looked
            at Smerdyakov again with alarm.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mercy on us! Could any one think of it all in such a
            desperate hurry? It was all thought out beforehand.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well ... well, it was the devil helped you!”</span>
            Ivan cried again. <span class="tei tei-q">“No, you are not a
            fool, you are far cleverer than I thought....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He got up,
            obviously intending to walk across the room. He was in terrible
            distress. But as the table blocked his way, and there was hardly
            room to pass between the table and the wall, he only turned round
            where he stood and sat down again. Perhaps the impossibility of
            moving irritated him, as he suddenly cried out almost as
            furiously as before.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Listen, you miserable, contemptible creature! Don't
            you understand that if I haven't killed you, it's simply because
            I am keeping you to answer to-morrow at the trial. God
            sees,”</span> Ivan raised his hand, <span class="tei tei-q">“perhaps I, too, was guilty; perhaps I really had a
            secret desire for my father's ... death, but I swear I was not as
            guilty as you think, and perhaps I didn't urge you on at all. No,
            no, I didn't urge you on! But no matter, I will give evidence
            against myself to-morrow at the trial. I'm determined to! I shall
            tell everything, everything. But we'll make our appearance
            together. And whatever you may say against me at the trial,
            whatever evidence you give, I'll face it; I am not afraid of you.
            I'll confirm <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page714">[pg
            714]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg714" name="Pg714"></a>
            it all myself! But you must confess, too! You must, you must;
            we'll go together. That's how it shall be!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan said this
            solemnly and resolutely and from his flashing eyes alone it could
            be seen that it would be so.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are ill, I see; you are quite ill. Your eyes are
            yellow,”</span> Smerdyakov commented, without the least irony,
            with apparent sympathy in fact.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We'll go together,”</span> Ivan repeated.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“And if you won't go, no matter, I'll go
            alone.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov
            paused as though pondering.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There'll be nothing of the sort, and you won't
            go,”</span> he concluded at last positively.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You don't understand me,”</span> Ivan exclaimed
            reproachfully.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You'll be too much ashamed, if you confess it all.
            And, what's more, it will be no use at all, for I shall say
            straight out that I never said anything of the sort to you, and
            that you are either ill (and it looks like it, too), or that
            you're so sorry for your brother that you are sacrificing
            yourself to save him and have invented it all against me, for
            you've always thought no more of me than if I'd been a fly. And
            who will believe you, and what single proof have you
            got?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Listen, you showed me those notes just now to
            convince me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov
            lifted the book off the notes and laid it on one side.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Take that money away with you,”</span> Smerdyakov
            sighed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Of course, I shall take it. But why do you give it
            to me, if you committed the murder for the sake of it?”</span>
            Ivan looked at him with great surprise.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't want it,”</span> Smerdyakov articulated in a
            shaking voice, with a gesture of refusal. <span class="tei tei-q">“I did have an idea of beginning a new life with that
            money in Moscow or, better still, abroad. I did dream of it,
            chiefly because <span class="tei tei-q">‘all things are
            lawful.’</span> That was quite right what you taught me, for you
            talked a lot to me about that. For if there's no everlasting God,
            there's no such thing as virtue, and there's no need of it. You
            were right there. So that's how I looked at it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Did you come to that of yourself?”</span> asked
            Ivan, with a wry smile.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“With your guidance.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page715">[pg 715]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg715" name="Pg715"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And now, I suppose, you believe in God, since you
            are giving back the money?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I don't believe,”</span> whispered
            Smerdyakov.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then why are you giving it back?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Leave off ... that's enough!”</span> Smerdyakov
            waved his hand again. <span class="tei tei-q">“You used to say
            yourself that everything was lawful, so now why are you so upset,
            too? You even want to go and give evidence against yourself....
            Only there'll be nothing of the sort! You won't go to give
            evidence,”</span> Smerdyakov decided with conviction.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You'll see,”</span> said Ivan.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It isn't possible. You are very clever. You are fond
            of money, I know that. You like to be respected, too, for you're
            very proud; you are far too fond of female charms, too, and you
            mind most of all about living in undisturbed comfort, without
            having to depend on any one—that's what you care most about. You
            won't want to spoil your life for ever by taking such a disgrace
            on yourself. You are like Fyodor Pavlovitch, you are more like
            him than any of his children; you've the same soul as he
            had.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are not a fool,”</span> said Ivan, seeming
            struck. The blood rushed to his face. <span class="tei tei-q">“You are serious now!”</span> he observed, looking
            suddenly at Smerdyakov with a different expression.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It was your pride made you think I was a fool. Take
            the money.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan took the
            three rolls of notes and put them in his pocket without wrapping
            them in anything.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I shall show them at the court to-morrow,”</span> he
            said.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nobody will believe you, as you've plenty of money
            of your own; you may simply have taken it out of your cash-box
            and brought it to the court.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan rose from
            his seat.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I repeat,”</span> he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“the only reason I haven't killed you is that I need
            you for to-morrow, remember that, don't forget it!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, kill me. Kill me now,”</span> Smerdyakov said,
            all at once looking strangely at Ivan. <span class="tei tei-q">“You won't dare do that even!”</span> he added, with
            a bitter smile. <span class="tei tei-q">“You won't dare to do
            anything, you, who used to be so bold!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Till to-morrow,”</span> cried Ivan, and moved to go
            out.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page716">[pg
            716]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg716" name="Pg716"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Stay a moment.... Show me those notes
            again.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan took out
            the notes and showed them to him. Smerdyakov looked at them for
            ten seconds.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, you can go,”</span> he said, with a wave of
            his hand. <span class="tei tei-q">“Ivan Fyodorovitch!”</span> he
            called after him again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you want?”</span> Ivan turned without
            stopping.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Good-by!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Till to-morrow!”</span> Ivan cried again, and he
            walked out of the cottage.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The snowstorm
            was still raging. He walked the first few steps boldly, but
            suddenly began staggering. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's
            something physical,”</span> he thought with a grin. Something
            like joy was springing up in his heart. He was conscious of
            unbounded resolution; he would make an end of the wavering that
            had so tortured him of late. His determination was taken,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“and now it will not be changed,”</span>
            he thought with relief. At that moment he stumbled against
            something and almost fell down. Stopping short, he made out at
            his feet the peasant he had knocked down, still lying senseless
            and motionless. The snow had almost covered his face. Ivan seized
            him and lifted him in his arms. Seeing a light in the little
            house to the right he went up, knocked at the shutters, and asked
            the man to whom the house belonged to help him carry the peasant
            to the police-station, promising him three roubles. The man got
            ready and came out. I won't describe in detail how Ivan succeeded
            in his object, bringing the peasant to the police-station and
            arranging for a doctor to see him at once, providing with a
            liberal hand for the expenses. I will only say that this business
            took a whole hour, but Ivan was well content with it. His mind
            wandered and worked incessantly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If I had not taken my decision so firmly for
            to-morrow,”</span> he reflected with satisfaction, <span class="tei tei-q">“I should not have stayed a whole hour to look after
            the peasant, but should have passed by, without caring about his
            being frozen. I am quite capable of watching myself, by the
            way,”</span> he thought at the same instant, with still greater
            satisfaction, <span class="tei tei-q">“although they have decided
            that I am going out of my mind!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Just as he
            reached his own house he stopped short, asking himself suddenly
            hadn't he better go at once to the prosecutor and tell
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page717">[pg 717]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg717" name="Pg717"></a> him everything. He
            decided the question by turning back to the house. <span class="tei tei-q">“Everything together to-morrow!”</span> he whispered
            to himself, and, strange to say, almost all his gladness and
            self-satisfaction passed in one instant.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">As he entered
            his own room he felt something like a touch of ice on his heart,
            like a recollection or, more exactly, a reminder, of something
            agonizing and revolting that was in that room now, at that
            moment, and had been there before. He sank wearily on his sofa.
            The old woman brought him a samovar; he made tea, but did not
            touch it. He sat on the sofa and felt giddy. He felt that he was
            ill and helpless. He was beginning to drop asleep, but got up
            uneasily and walked across the room to shake off his drowsiness.
            At moments he fancied he was delirious, but it was not illness
            that he thought of most. Sitting down again, he began looking
            round, as though searching for something. This happened several
            times. At last his eyes were fastened intently on one point. Ivan
            smiled, but an angry flush suffused his face. He sat a long time
            in his place, his head propped on both arms, though he looked
            sideways at the same point, at the sofa that stood against the
            opposite wall. There was evidently something, some object, that
            irritated him there, worried him and tormented him.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em">
<a id="toc185" name="toc185"></a> <a id="pdf186" name="pdf186"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
