<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-3-2" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-3-2-4" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.40em; margin-top: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter IV. In The Dark</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Where was he
            running? <span class="tei tei-q">“Where could she be except at
            Fyodor Pavlovitch's? She must have run straight to him from
            Samsonov's, that was clear now. The whole intrigue, the whole
            deceit was evident.”</span> ... It all rushed whirling through
            his mind. He did not run to Marya Kondratyevna's. <span class="tei tei-q">“There was no need to go there ... not the slightest
            need ... he must raise no alarm ... they would run and tell
            directly.... Marya Kondratyevna was clearly in the plot,
            Smerdyakov too, he too, all had been bought over!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He formed
            another plan of action: he ran a long way round Fyodor
            Pavlovitch's house, crossing the lane, running down Dmitrovsky
            Street, then over the little bridge, and so came straight to the
            deserted alley at the back, which was empty and uninhabited,
            with, on one side the hurdle fence of a neighbor's
            kitchen-garden, on the other the strong high fence, that ran all
            round Fyodor Pavlovitch's garden. Here he chose a spot,
            apparently the very place, where according to the tradition, he
            knew Lizaveta had once climbed over it: <span class="tei tei-q">“If she could climb over it,”</span> the thought, God
            knows why, occurred to him, <span class="tei tei-q">“surely I
            can.”</span> He did in fact jump up, and instantly contrived to
            catch hold of the top of the fence. Then he vigorously pulled
            himself up and sat astride on it. Close by, in the garden stood
            the bath-house, but from the fence he could see the lighted
            windows of the house too.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, the old man's bedroom is lighted up. She's
            there!”</span> and he leapt from the fence into the garden.
            Though he knew Grigory was ill and very likely Smerdyakov, too,
            and that there was no one to hear him, he instinctively hid
            himself, stood still, and began to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page437">[pg 437]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg437" name="Pg437"></a> listen. But there was dead silence on all
            sides and, as though of design, complete stillness, not the
            slightest breath of wind.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And naught but the whispering silence,”</span> the
            line for some reason rose to his mind. <span class="tei tei-q">“If only no one heard me jump over the fence! I think
            not.”</span> Standing still for a minute, he walked softly over
            the grass in the garden, avoiding the trees and shrubs. He walked
            slowly, creeping stealthily at every step, listening to his own
            footsteps. It took him five minutes to reach the lighted window.
            He remembered that just under the window there were several thick
            and high bushes of elder and whitebeam. The door from the house
            into the garden on the left-hand side, was shut; he had carefully
            looked on purpose to see, in passing. At last he reached the
            bushes and hid behind them. He held his breath. <span class="tei tei-q">“I must wait now,”</span> he thought, <span class="tei tei-q">“to reassure them, in case they heard my footsteps
            and are listening ... if only I don't cough or
            sneeze.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He waited two
            minutes. His heart was beating violently, and, at moments, he
            could scarcely breathe. <span class="tei tei-q">“No, this
            throbbing at my heart won't stop,”</span> he thought.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I can't wait any longer.”</span> He was
            standing behind a bush in the shadow. The light of the window
            fell on the front part of the bush.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How red the whitebeam berries are!”</span> he
            murmured, not knowing why. Softly and noiselessly, step by step,
            he approached the window, and raised himself on tiptoe. All
            Fyodor Pavlovitch's bedroom lay open before him. It was not a
            large room, and was divided in two parts by a red screen,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Chinese,”</span> as Fyodor Pavlovitch
            used to call it. The word <span class="tei tei-q">“Chinese”</span> flashed into Mitya's mind,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“and behind the screen, is
            Grushenka,”</span> thought Mitya. He began watching Fyodor
            Pavlovitch, who was wearing his new striped-silk dressing-gown,
            which Mitya had never seen, and a silk cord with tassels round
            the waist. A clean, dandified shirt of fine linen with gold studs
            peeped out under the collar of the dressing-gown. On his head
            Fyodor Pavlovitch had the same red bandage which Alyosha had
            seen.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He has got himself up,”</span> thought Mitya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">His father was
            standing near the window, apparently lost in thought. Suddenly he
            jerked up his head, listened a moment, and hearing nothing went
            up to the table, poured out half a glass of brandy from a
            decanter and drank it off. Then he uttered a deep <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page438">[pg 438]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg438" name="Pg438"></a> sigh, again stood still a
            moment, walked carelessly up to the looking-glass on the wall,
            with his right hand raised the red bandage on his forehead a
            little, and began examining his bruises and scars, which had not
            yet disappeared.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He's alone,”</span> thought Mitya, <span class="tei tei-q">“in all probability he's alone.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Fyodor
            Pavlovitch moved away from the looking-glass, turned suddenly to
            the window and looked out. Mitya instantly slipped away into the
            shadow.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She may be there behind the screen. Perhaps she's
            asleep by now,”</span> he thought, with a pang at his heart.
            Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the window. <span class="tei tei-q">“He's looking for her out of the window, so she's not
            there. Why should he stare out into the dark? He's wild with
            impatience.”</span> ... Mitya slipped back at once, and fell to
            gazing in at the window again. The old man was sitting down at
            the table, apparently disappointed. At last he put his elbow on
            the table, and laid his right cheek against his hand. Mitya
            watched him eagerly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He's alone, he's alone!”</span> he repeated again.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“If she were here, his face would be
            different.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Strange to
            say, a queer, irrational vexation rose up in his heart that she
            was not here. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's not that she's not
            here,”</span> he explained to himself, immediately, <span class="tei tei-q">“but that I can't tell for certain whether she is or
            not.”</span> Mitya remembered afterwards that his mind was at
            that moment exceptionally clear, that he took in everything to
            the slightest detail, and missed no point. But a feeling of
            misery, the misery of uncertainty and indecision, was growing in
            his heart with every instant. <span class="tei tei-q">“Is she
            here or not?”</span> The angry doubt filled his heart, and
            suddenly, making up his mind, he put out his hand and softly
            knocked on the window frame. He knocked the signal the old man
            had agreed upon with Smerdyakov, twice slowly and then three
            times more quickly, the signal that meant <span class="tei tei-q">“Grushenka is here!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The old man
            started, jerked up his head, and, jumping up quickly, ran to the
            window. Mitya slipped away into the shadow. Fyodor Pavlovitch
            opened the window and thrust his whole head out.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Grushenka, is it you? Is it you?”</span> he said, in
            a sort of trembling half-whisper. <span class="tei tei-q">“Where
            are you, my angel, where are you?”</span> He was fearfully
            agitated and breathless.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page439">[pg 439]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg439" name="Pg439"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He's alone.”</span> Mitya decided.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Where are you?”</span> cried the old man again; and
            he thrust his head out farther, thrust it out to the shoulders,
            gazing in all directions, right and left. <span class="tei tei-q">“Come here, I've a little present for you. Come, I'll
            show you....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He means the three thousand,”</span> thought
            Mitya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But where are you? Are you at the door? I'll open it
            directly.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And the old
            man almost climbed out of the window, peering out to the right,
            where there was a door into the garden, trying to see into the
            darkness. In another second he would certainly have run out to
            open the door without waiting for Grushenka's answer.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya looked
            at him from the side without stirring. The old man's profile that
            he loathed so, his pendent Adam's apple, his hooked nose, his
            lips that smiled in greedy expectation, were all brightly lighted
            up by the slanting lamplight falling on the left from the room. A
            horrible fury of hatred suddenly surged up in Mitya's heart:
            <span class="tei tei-q">“There he was, his rival, the man who had
            tormented him, had ruined his life!”</span> It was a rush of that
            sudden, furious, revengeful anger of which he had spoken, as
            though foreseeing it, to Alyosha, four days ago in the arbor,
            when, in answer to Alyosha's question, <span class="tei tei-q">“How can you say you'll kill our father?”</span>
<span class="tei tei-q">“I don't know, I don't know,”</span> he
            had said then. <span class="tei tei-q">“Perhaps I shall not kill
            him, perhaps I shall. I'm afraid he'll suddenly be so loathsome
            to me at that moment. I hate his double chin, his nose, his eyes,
            his shameless grin. I feel a personal repulsion. That's what I'm
            afraid of, that's what may be too much for me.”</span> ... This
            personal repulsion was growing unendurable. Mitya was beside
            himself, he suddenly pulled the brass pestle out of his
            pocket.</p>
<div class="tei tei-tb">
<hr style="width: 50%"/>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“God was watching over me then,”</span> Mitya himself
            said afterwards. At that very moment Grigory waked up on his bed
            of sickness. Earlier in the evening he had undergone the
            treatment which Smerdyakov had described to Ivan. He had rubbed
            himself all over with vodka mixed with a secret, very strong
            decoction, had drunk what was left of the mixture while his wife
            repeated a <span class="tei tei-q">“certain prayer”</span> over
            him, after which he had gone to bed. Marfa Ignatyevna had tasted
            the stuff, too, and, being unused to strong drink, slept like the
            dead beside her husband.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page440">[pg 440]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg440" name="Pg440"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Grigory
            waked up in the night, quite suddenly, and, after a moment's
            reflection, though he immediately felt a sharp pain in his back,
            he sat up in bed. Then he deliberated again, got up and dressed
            hurriedly. Perhaps his conscience was uneasy at the thought of
            sleeping while the house was unguarded <span class="tei tei-q">“in such perilous times.”</span> Smerdyakov,
            exhausted by his fit, lay motionless in the next room. Marfa
            Ignatyevna did not stir. <span class="tei tei-q">“The stuff's
            been too much for the woman,”</span> Grigory thought, glancing at
            her, and groaning, he went out on the steps. No doubt he only
            intended to look out from the steps, for he was hardly able to
            walk, the pain in his back and his right leg was intolerable. But
            he suddenly remembered that he had not locked the little gate
            into the garden that evening. He was the most punctual and
            precise of men, a man who adhered to an unchangeable routine, and
            habits that lasted for years. Limping and writhing with pain he
            went down the steps and towards the garden. Yes, the gate stood
            wide open. Mechanically he stepped into the garden. Perhaps he
            fancied something, perhaps caught some sound, and, glancing to
            the left he saw his master's window open. No one was looking out
            of it then.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What's it open for? It's not summer now,”</span>
            thought Grigory, and suddenly, at that very instant he caught a
            glimpse of something extraordinary before him in the garden.
            Forty paces in front of him a man seemed to be running in the
            dark, a sort of shadow was moving very fast.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Good Lord!”</span> cried Grigory beside himself, and
            forgetting the pain in his back, he hurried to intercept the
            running figure. He took a short cut, evidently he knew the garden
            better; the flying figure went towards the bath-house, ran behind
            it and rushed to the garden fence. Grigory followed, not losing
            sight of him, and ran, forgetting everything. He reached the
            fence at the very moment the man was climbing over it. Grigory
            cried out, beside himself, pounced on him, and clutched his leg
            in his two hands.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Yes, his
            foreboding had not deceived him. He recognized him, it was he,
            the <span class="tei tei-q">“monster,”</span> the <span class="tei tei-q">“parricide.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Parricide!”</span> the old man shouted so that the
            whole neighborhood could hear, but he had not time to shout more,
            he fell at once, as though struck by lightning.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya jumped
            back into the garden and bent over the fallen man. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page441">[pg 441]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg441" name="Pg441"></a> In Mitya's hands was a brass
            pestle, and he flung it mechanically in the grass. The pestle
            fell two paces from Grigory, not in the grass but on the path, in
            a most conspicuous place. For some seconds he examined the
            prostrate figure before him. The old man's head was covered with
            blood. Mitya put out his hand and began feeling it. He remembered
            afterwards clearly, that he had been awfully anxious to make sure
            whether he had broken the old man's skull, or simply stunned him
            with the pestle. But the blood was flowing horribly; and in a
            moment Mitya's fingers were drenched with the hot stream. He
            remembered taking out of his pocket the clean white handkerchief
            with which he had provided himself for his visit to Madame
            Hohlakov, and putting it to the old man's head, senselessly
            trying to wipe the blood from his face and temples. But the
            handkerchief was instantly soaked with blood.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Good heavens! what am I doing it for?”</span>
            thought Mitya, suddenly pulling himself together. <span class="tei tei-q">“If I have broken his skull, how can I find out now?
            And what difference does it make now?”</span> he added,
            hopelessly. <span class="tei tei-q">“If I've killed him, I've
            killed him.... You've come to grief, old man, so there you must
            lie!”</span> he said aloud. And suddenly turning to the fence, he
            vaulted over it into the lane and fell to running—the
            handkerchief soaked with blood he held, crushed up in his right
            fist, and as he ran he thrust it into the back pocket of his
            coat. He ran headlong, and the few passers-by who met him in the
            dark, in the streets, remembered afterwards that they had met a
            man running that night. He flew back again to the widow Morozov's
            house.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Immediately
            after he had left it that evening, Fenya had rushed to the chief
            porter, Nazar Ivanovitch, and besought him, for Christ's sake,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“not to let the captain in again to-day
            or to-morrow.”</span> Nazar Ivanovitch promised, but went
            upstairs to his mistress who had suddenly sent for him, and
            meeting his nephew, a boy of twenty, who had recently come from
            the country, on the way up told him to take his place, but forgot
            to mention <span class="tei tei-q">“the captain.”</span> Mitya,
            running up to the gate, knocked. The lad instantly recognized
            him, for Mitya had more than once tipped him. Opening the gate at
            once, he let him in, and hastened to inform him with a
            good-humored smile that <span class="tei tei-q">“Agrafena
            Alexandrovna is not at home now, you
            know.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page442">[pg
            442]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg442" name="Pg442"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Where is she then, Prohor?”</span> asked Mitya,
            stopping short.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She set off this evening, some two hours ago, with
            Timofey, to Mokroe.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What for?”</span> cried Mitya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That I can't say. To see some officer. Some one
            invited her and horses were sent to fetch her.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya left
            him, and ran like a madman to Fenya.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 3.00em; margin-bottom: 3.00em">
<a id="toc121" name="toc121"></a> <a id="pdf122" name="pdf122"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
