<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="book-3-2" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-3-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
					<h2 epub:type="title">
						<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">The First And Rightful Lover</span>
					</h2>
					<p>With his long, rapid strides, Mitya walked straight up to the table.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen,”</span> he said in a loud voice, almost shouting, yet stammering at every word, <span class="tei tei-q">“I ... I'm all right! Don't be afraid!”</span> he exclaimed, <span class="tei tei-q">“I—there's nothing the matter,”</span> he turned suddenly to Grushenka, who had shrunk back in her chair towards Kalganov, and clasped his hand tightly. <span class="tei tei-q">“I ... I'm coming, too. I'm here till morning. Gentlemen, may I stay with you till morning? Only till morning, for the last time, in this same room?”</span></p>
					<p>So he finished, turning to the fat little man, with the pipe, sitting on the sofa. The latter removed his pipe from his lips with dignity and observed severely:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Panie</span></span>, we're here in private. There are other rooms.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, it's you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch! What do you mean?”</span> answered Kalganov suddenly. <span class="tei tei-q">“Sit down with us. How are you?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Delighted to see you, dear ... and precious fellow, I always thought a lot of you.”</span> Mitya responded, joyfully and eagerly, at once holding out his hand across the table.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Aie! How tight you squeeze! You've quite broken my fingers,”</span> laughed Kalganov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He always squeezes like that, always,”</span> Grushenka put in gayly, with a timid smile, seeming suddenly convinced from Mitya's face that he was not going to make a scene. She was watching him with intense curiosity and still some uneasiness. She was impressed by something about him, and indeed the last thing she expected of him was that he would come in and speak like this at such a moment.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Good evening,”</span> Maximov ventured blandly on the left. Mitya rushed up to him, too.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Good evening. You're here, too! How glad I am to find you here, too! Gentlemen, gentlemen, I—”</span> (He addressed the Polish gentleman with the pipe again, evidently taking him for the most important person present.) <span class="tei tei-q">“I flew here.... I wanted to spend my last day, my last hour in this room, in this very room ... where I, too, adored ... my queen.... Forgive me, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,”</span> he cried wildly, <span class="tei tei-q">“I flew here and vowed— Oh, don't be afraid, it's my last night! Let's drink to our good understanding. They'll bring the wine at once.... I brought this with me.”</span> (Something made him pull out his bundle of notes.) <span class="tei tei-q">“Allow me, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>! I want to have music, singing, a revel, as we had before. But the worm, the unnecessary worm, will crawl away, and there'll be no more of him. I will commemorate my day of joy on my last night.”</span></p>
					<p>He was almost choking. There was so much, so much he wanted to say, but strange exclamations were all that came from his lips. The Pole gazed fixedly at him, at the bundle of notes in his hand; looked at Grushenka, and was in evident perplexity.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“If my suverin lady is permitting—”</span> he was beginning.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What does <span class="tei tei-q">‘suverin’</span> mean? <span class="tei tei-q">‘Sovereign,’</span> I suppose?”</span> interrupted Grushenka. <span class="tei tei-q">“I can't help laughing at you, the way you talk. Sit down, Mitya, what are you talking about? Don't frighten us, please. You won't frighten us, will you? If you won't, I am glad to see you ...”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Me, me frighten you?”</span> cried Mitya, flinging up his hands. <span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, pass me by, go your way, I won't hinder you!...”</span></p>
					<p>And suddenly he surprised them all, and no doubt himself as well, by flinging himself on a chair, and bursting into tears, turning his head away to the opposite wall, while his arms clasped the back of the chair tight, as though embracing it.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Come, come, what a fellow you are!”</span> cried Grushenka reproachfully. <span class="tei tei-q">“That's just how he comes to see me—he begins talking, and I can't make out what he means. He cried like that once before, and now he's crying again! It's shameful! Why are you crying? <em>As though you had anything to cry for!</em>”</span> she added enigmatically, emphasizing each word with some irritability.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I ... I'm not crying.... Well, good evening!”</span> He instantly turned round in his chair, and suddenly laughed, not his abrupt wooden laugh, but a long, quivering, inaudible nervous laugh.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, there you are again.... Come, cheer up, cheer up!”</span> Grushenka said to him persuasively. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'm very glad you've come, very glad, Mitya, do you hear, I'm very glad! I want him to stay here with us,”</span> she said peremptorily, addressing the whole company, though her words were obviously meant for the man sitting on the sofa. <span class="tei tei-q">“I wish it, I wish it! And if he goes away I shall go, too!”</span> she added with flashing eyes.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What my queen commands is law!”</span> pronounced the Pole, gallantly kissing Grushenka's hand. <span class="tei tei-q">“I beg you, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>, to join our company,”</span> he added politely, addressing Mitya.</p>
					<p>Mitya was jumping up with the obvious intention of delivering another tirade, but the words did not come.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Let's drink, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,”</span> he blurted out instead of making a speech. Every one laughed.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Good heavens! I thought he was going to begin again!”</span> Grushenka exclaimed nervously. <span class="tei tei-q">“Do you hear, Mitya,”</span> she went on insistently, <span class="tei tei-q">“don't prance about, but it's nice you've brought the champagne. I want some myself, and I can't bear liqueurs. And best of all, you've come yourself. We were fearfully dull here.... You've come for a spree again, I suppose? But put your money in your pocket. Where did you get such a lot?”</span></p>
					<p>Mitya had been, all this time, holding in his hand the crumpled bundle of notes on which the eyes of all, especially of the Poles, were fixed. In confusion he thrust them hurriedly into his pocket. He flushed. At that moment the innkeeper brought in an uncorked bottle of champagne, and glasses on a tray. Mitya snatched up the bottle, but he was so bewildered that he did not know what to do with it. Kalganov took it from him and poured out the champagne.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Another! Another bottle!”</span> Mitya cried to the innkeeper, and, forgetting to clink glasses with the Pole whom he had so solemnly invited to drink to their good understanding, he drank off his glass without waiting for any one else. His whole countenance suddenly changed. The solemn and tragic expression with which he had entered vanished completely, and a look of something childlike came into his face. He seemed to have become suddenly gentle and subdued. He looked shyly and happily at every one, with a continual nervous little laugh, and the blissful expression of a dog who has done wrong, been punished, and forgiven. He seemed to have forgotten everything, and was looking round at every one with a childlike smile of delight. He looked at Grushenka, laughing continually, and bringing his chair close up to her. By degrees he had gained some idea of the two Poles, though he had formed no definite conception of them yet.</p>
					<p>The Pole on the sofa struck him by his dignified demeanor and his Polish accent; and, above all, by his pipe. <span class="tei tei-q">“Well, what of it? It's a good thing he's smoking a pipe,”</span> he reflected. The Pole's puffy, middle-aged face, with its tiny nose and two very thin, pointed, dyed and impudent-looking mustaches, had not so far roused the faintest doubts in Mitya. He was not even particularly struck by the Pole's absurd wig made in Siberia, with love-locks foolishly combed forward over the temples. <span class="tei tei-q">“I suppose it's all right since he wears a wig,”</span> he went on, musing blissfully. The other, younger Pole, who was staring insolently and defiantly at the company and listening to the conversation with silent contempt, still only impressed Mitya by his great height, which was in striking contrast to the Pole on the sofa. <span class="tei tei-q">“If he stood up he'd be six foot three.”</span> The thought flitted through Mitya's mind. It occurred to him, too, that this Pole must be the friend of the other, as it were, a <span class="tei tei-q">“bodyguard,”</span> and no doubt the big Pole was at the disposal of the little Pole with the pipe. But this all seemed to Mitya perfectly right and not to be questioned. In his mood of doglike submissiveness all feeling of rivalry had died away.</p>
					<p>Grushenka's mood and the enigmatic tone of some of her words he completely failed to grasp. All he understood, with thrilling heart, was that she was kind to him, that she had forgiven him, and made him sit by her. He was beside himself with delight, watching her sip her glass of champagne. The silence of the company seemed somehow to strike him, however, and he looked round at every one with expectant eyes.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Why are we sitting here though, gentlemen? Why don't you begin doing something?”</span> his smiling eyes seemed to ask.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He keeps talking nonsense, and we were all laughing,”</span> Kalganov began suddenly, as though divining his thought, and pointing to Maximov.</p>
					<p>Mitya immediately stared at Kalganov and then at Maximov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He's talking nonsense?”</span> he laughed, his short, wooden laugh, seeming suddenly delighted at something—<span class="tei tei-q">“ha ha!”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes. Would you believe it, he will have it that all our cavalry officers in the twenties married Polish women. That's awful rot, isn't it?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Polish women?”</span> repeated Mitya, perfectly ecstatic.</p>
					<p>Kalganov was well aware of Mitya's attitude to Grushenka, and he guessed about the Pole, too, but that did not so much interest him, perhaps did not interest him at all; what he was interested in was Maximov. He had come here with Maximov by chance, and he met the Poles here at the inn for the first time in his life. Grushenka he knew before, and had once been with some one to see her; but she had not taken to him. But here she looked at him very affectionately: before Mitya's arrival, she had been making much of him, but he seemed somehow to be unmoved by it. He was a boy, not over twenty, dressed like a dandy, with a very charming fair-skinned face, and splendid thick, fair hair. From his fair face looked out beautiful pale blue eyes, with an intelligent and sometimes even deep expression, beyond his age indeed, although the young man sometimes looked and talked quite like a child, and was not at all ashamed of it, even when he was aware of it himself. As a rule he was very willful, even capricious, though always friendly. Sometimes there was something fixed and obstinate in his expression. He would look at you and listen, seeming all the while to be persistently dreaming over something else. Often he was listless and lazy, at other times he would grow excited, sometimes, apparently, over the most trivial matters.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Only imagine, I've been taking him about with me for the last four days,”</span> he went on, indolently drawling his words, quite naturally though, without the slightest affectation. <span class="tei tei-q">“Ever since your brother, do you remember, shoved him off the carriage and sent him flying. That made me take an interest in him at the time, and I took him into the country, but he keeps talking such rot I'm ashamed to be with him. I'm taking him back.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The gentleman has not seen Polish ladies, and says what is impossible,”</span> the Pole with the pipe observed to Maximov.</p>
					<p>He spoke Russian fairly well, much better, anyway, than he pretended. If he used Russian words, he always distorted them into a Polish form.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“But I was married to a Polish lady myself,”</span> tittered Maximov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“But did you serve in the cavalry? You were talking about the cavalry. Were you a cavalry officer?”</span> put in Kalganov at once.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Was he a cavalry officer indeed? Ha ha!”</span> cried Mitya, listening eagerly, and turning his inquiring eyes to each as he spoke, as though there were no knowing what he might hear from each.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“No, you see,”</span> Maximov turned to him. <span class="tei tei-q">“What I mean is that those pretty Polish ladies ... when they danced the mazurka with our Uhlans ... when one of them dances a mazurka with a Uhlan she jumps on his knee like a kitten ... a little white one ... and the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span>-father and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span>-mother look on and allow it.... They allow it ... and next day the Uhlan comes and offers her his hand.... That's how it is ... offers her his hand, he he!”</span> Maximov ended, tittering.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span> is a <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">lajdak</span></span>!”</span> the tall Pole on the chair growled suddenly and crossed one leg over the other. Mitya's eye was caught by his huge greased boot, with its thick, dirty sole. The dress of both the Poles looked rather greasy.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, now it's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">lajdak</span></span>! What's he scolding about?”</span> said Grushenka, suddenly vexed.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pani</span></span> Agrippina, what the gentleman saw in Poland were servant girls, and not ladies of good birth,”</span> the Pole with the pipe observed to Grushenka.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“You can reckon on that,”</span> the tall Pole snapped contemptuously.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What next! Let him talk! People talk, why hinder them? It makes it cheerful,”</span> Grushenka said crossly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I'm not hindering them, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">pani</span></span>,”</span> said the Pole in the wig, with a long look at Grushenka, and relapsing into dignified silence he sucked his pipe again.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“No, no. The Polish gentleman spoke the truth.”</span> Kalganov got excited again, as though it were a question of vast import. <span class="tei tei-q">“He's never been in Poland, so how can he talk about it? I suppose you weren't married in Poland, were you?”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No, in the Province of Smolensk. Only, a Uhlan had brought her to Russia before that, my future wife, with her mamma and her aunt, and another female relation with a grown-up son. He brought her straight from Poland and gave her up to me. He was a lieutenant in our regiment, a very nice young man. At first he meant to marry her himself. But he didn't marry her, because she turned out to be lame.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“So you married a lame woman?”</span> cried Kalganov.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes. They both deceived me a little bit at the time, and concealed it. I thought she was hopping; she kept hopping.... I thought it was for fun.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“So pleased she was going to marry you!”</span> yelled Kalganov, in a ringing, childish voice.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, so pleased. But it turned out to be quite a different cause. Afterwards, when we were married, after the wedding, that very evening, she confessed, and very touchingly asked forgiveness. <span class="tei tei-q">‘I once jumped over a puddle when I was a child,’</span> she said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘and injured my leg.’</span> He he!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Kalganov went off into the most childish laughter, almost falling on the sofa. Grushenka, too, laughed. Mitya was at the pinnacle of happiness.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you know, that's the truth, he's not lying now,”</span> exclaimed Kalganov, turning to Mitya; <span class="tei tei-q">“and do you know, he's been married twice; it's his first wife he's talking about. But his second wife, do you know, ran away, and is alive now.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Is it possible?”</span> said Mitya, turning quickly to Maximov with an expression of the utmost astonishment.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes. She did run away. I've had that unpleasant experience,”</span> Maximov modestly assented, <span class="tei tei-q">“with a <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">monsieur</span></span>. And what was worse, she'd had all my little property transferred to her beforehand. <span class="tei tei-q">‘You're an educated man,’</span> she said to me. <span class="tei tei-q">‘You can always get your living.’</span> She settled my business with that. A venerable bishop once said to me: <span class="tei tei-q">‘One of your wives was lame, but the other was too light-footed.’</span> He he!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Listen, listen!”</span> cried Kalganov, bubbling over, <span class="tei tei-q">“if he's telling lies—and he often is—he's only doing it to amuse us all. There's no harm in that, is there? You know, I sometimes like him. He's awfully low, but it's natural to him, eh? Don't you think so? Some people are low from self-interest, but he's simply so, from nature. Only fancy, he claims (he was arguing about it all the way yesterday) that Gogol wrote <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dead Souls</span></span> about him. Do you remember, there's a landowner called Maximov in it, whom Nozdryov thrashed. He was charged, do you remember, <span class="tei tei-q">‘for inflicting bodily injury with rods on the landowner Maximov in a drunken condition.’</span> Would you believe it, he claims that he was that Maximov and that he was beaten! Now can it be so? Tchitchikov made his journey, at the very latest, at the beginning of the twenties, so that the dates don't fit. He couldn't have been thrashed then, he couldn't, could he?”</span></p>
					<p>It was difficult to imagine what Kalganov was excited about, but his excitement was genuine. Mitya followed his lead without protest.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, but if they did thrash him!”</span> he cried, laughing.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It's not that they thrashed me exactly, but what I mean is—”</span> put in Maximov.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean? Either they thrashed you or they didn't.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What o'clock is it, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>?”</span> the Pole, with the pipe, asked his tall friend, with a bored expression. The other shrugged his shoulders in reply. Neither of them had a watch.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Why not talk? Let other people talk. Mustn't other people talk because you're bored?”</span> Grushenka flew at him with evident intention of finding fault. Something seemed for the first time to flash upon Mitya's mind. This time the Pole answered with unmistakable irritability.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pani</span></span>, I didn't oppose it. I didn't say anything.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“All right then. Come, tell us your story,”</span> Grushenka cried to Maximov. <span class="tei tei-q">“Why are you all silent?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“There's nothing to tell, it's all so foolish,”</span> answered Maximov at once, with evident satisfaction, mincing a little. <span class="tei tei-q">“Besides, all that's by way of allegory in Gogol, for he's made all the names have a meaning. Nozdryov was really called Nosov, and Kuvshinikov had quite a different name, he was called Shkvornev. Fenardi really was called Fenardi, only he wasn't an Italian but a Russian, and Mamsel Fenardi was a pretty girl with her pretty little legs in tights, and she had a little short skirt with spangles, and she kept turning round and round, only not for four hours but for four minutes only, and she bewitched every one...”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“But what were you beaten for?”</span> cried Kalganov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“For Piron!”</span> answered Maximov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What Piron?”</span> cried Mitya.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“The famous French writer, Piron. We were all drinking then, a big party of us, in a tavern at that very fair. They'd invited me, and first of all I began quoting epigrams. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Is that you, Boileau? What a funny get-up!’</span> and Boileau answers that he's going to a masquerade, that is to the baths, he he! And they took it to themselves, so I made haste to repeat another, very sarcastic, well known to all educated people:</span>
					</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">Yes, Sappho and Phaon are we!</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">But one grief is weighing on me.</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">You don't know your way to the sea!</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>They were still more offended and began abusing me in the most unseemly way for it. And as ill-luck would have it, to set things right, I began telling a very cultivated anecdote about Piron, how he was not accepted into the French Academy, and to revenge himself wrote his own epitaph:</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">Ci-gÃ®t Piron qui ne fut rien,</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">Pas même académicien.</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">They seized me and thrashed me.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“But what for? What for?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“For my education. People can thrash a man for anything,”</span> Maximov concluded, briefly and sententiously.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Eh, that's enough! That's all stupid, I don't want to listen. I thought it would be amusing,”</span> Grushenka cut them short, suddenly.</p>
					<p>Mitya started, and at once left off laughing. The tall Pole rose upon his feet, and with the haughty air of a man, bored and out of his element, began pacing from corner to corner of the room, his hands behind his back.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, he can't sit still,”</span> said Grushenka, looking at him contemptuously. Mitya began to feel anxious. He noticed besides, that the Pole on the sofa was looking at him with an irritable expression.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Panie!</span></span>”</span> cried Mitya, <span class="tei tei-q">“let's drink! and the other <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span>, too! Let us drink.”</span></p>
					<p>In a flash he had pulled three glasses towards him, and filled them with champagne.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“To Poland, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie</span></span>, I drink to your Poland!”</span> cried Mitya.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I shall be delighted, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,”</span> said the Pole on the sofa, with dignity and affable condescension, and he took his glass.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And the other <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span>, what's his name? Drink, most illustrious, take your glass!”</span> Mitya urged.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Pan Vrublevsky,”</span> put in the Pole on the sofa.</p>
					<p>Pan Vrublevsky came up to the table, swaying as he walked.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“To Poland, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie!</span></span>”</span> cried Mitya, raising his glass. <span class="tei tei-q">“Hurrah!”</span></p>
					<p>All three drank. Mitya seized the bottle and again poured out three glasses.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Now to Russia, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie</span></span>, and let us be brothers!”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Pour out some for us,”</span> said Grushenka; <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll drink to Russia, too!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“So will I,”</span> said Kalganov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And I would, too ... to Russia, the old grandmother!”</span> tittered Maximov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“All! All!”</span> cried Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“Trifon Borissovitch, some more bottles!”</span></p>
					<p>The other three bottles Mitya had brought with him were put on the table. Mitya filled the glasses.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“To Russia! Hurrah!”</span> he shouted again. All drank the toast except the Poles, and Grushenka tossed off her whole glass at once. The Poles did not touch theirs.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“How's this, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie</span></span>?”</span> cried Mitya, <span class="tei tei-q">“won't you drink it?”</span></p>
					<p>Pan Vrublevsky took the glass, raised it and said with a resonant voice:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“To Russia as she was before 1772.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Come, that's better!”</span> cried the other Pole, and they both emptied their glasses at once.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“You're fools, you <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie</span></span>,”</span> broke suddenly from Mitya.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Panie!</span></span>”</span> shouted both the Poles, menacingly, setting on Mitya like a couple of cocks. Pan Vrublevsky was specially furious.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Can one help loving one's own country?”</span> he shouted.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Be silent! Don't quarrel! I won't have any quarreling!”</span> cried Grushenka imperiously, and she stamped her foot on the floor. Her face glowed, her eyes were shining. The effects of the glass she had just drunk were apparent. Mitya was terribly alarmed.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Panovie</span></span>, forgive me! It was my fault, I'm sorry. Vrublevsky, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span> Vrublevsky, I'm sorry.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Hold your tongue, you, anyway! Sit down, you stupid!”</span> Grushenka scolded with angry annoyance.</p>
					<p>Every one sat down, all were silent, looking at one another.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen, I was the cause of it all,”</span> Mitya began again, unable to make anything of Grushenka's words. <span class="tei tei-q">“Come, why are we sitting here? What shall we do ... to amuse ourselves again?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Ach, it's certainly anything but amusing!”</span> Kalganov mumbled lazily.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Let's play faro again, as we did just now,”</span> Maximov tittered suddenly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Faro? Splendid!”</span> cried Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“If only the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie</span></span>—”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It's lite, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie</span></span>,”</span> the Pole on the sofa responded, as it were unwillingly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“That's true,”</span> assented Pan Vrublevsky.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Lite? What do you mean by <span class="tei tei-q">‘lite’</span>?”</span> asked Grushenka.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Late, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pani</span></span>! <span class="tei tei-q">‘a late hour’</span> I mean,”</span> the Pole on the sofa explained.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It's always late with them. They can never do anything!”</span> Grushenka almost shrieked in her anger. <span class="tei tei-q">“They're dull themselves, so they want others to be dull. Before you came, Mitya, they were just as silent and kept turning up their noses at me.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“My goddess!”</span> cried the Pole on the sofa, <span class="tei tei-q">“I see you're not well-disposed to me, that's why I'm gloomy. I'm ready, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,”</span> added he, addressing Mitya.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Begin, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,”</span> Mitya assented, pulling his notes out of his pocket, and laying two hundred-rouble notes on the table. <span class="tei tei-q">“I want to lose a lot to you. Take your cards. Make the bank.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“We'll have cards from the landlord, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,”</span> said the little Pole, gravely and emphatically.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“That's much the best way,”</span> chimed in Pan Vrublevsky.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“From the landlord? Very good, I understand, let's get them from him. Cards!”</span> Mitya shouted to the landlord.</p>
					<p>The landlord brought in a new, unopened pack, and informed Mitya that the girls were getting ready, and that the Jews with the cymbals would most likely be here soon; but the cart with the provisions had not yet arrived. Mitya jumped up from the table and ran into the next room to give orders, but only three girls had arrived, and Marya was not there yet. And he did not know himself what orders to give and why he had run out. He only told them to take out of the box the presents for the girls, the sweets, the toffee and the fondants. <span class="tei tei-q">“And vodka for Andrey, vodka for Andrey!”</span> he cried in haste. <span class="tei tei-q">“I was rude to Andrey!”</span></p>
					<p>Suddenly Maximov, who had followed him out, touched him on the shoulder.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Give me five roubles,”</span> he whispered to Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll stake something at faro, too, he he!”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Capital! Splendid! Take ten, here!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Again he took all the notes out of his pocket and picked out one for ten roubles. <span class="tei tei-q">“And if you lose that, come again, come again.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Very good,”</span> Maximov whispered joyfully, and he ran back again. Mitya, too, returned, apologizing for having kept them waiting. The Poles had already sat down, and opened the pack. They looked much more amiable, almost cordial. The Pole on the sofa had lighted another pipe and was preparing to throw. He wore an air of solemnity.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“To your places, gentlemen,”</span> cried Pan Vrublevsky.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I'm not going to play any more,”</span> observed Kalganov, <span class="tei tei-q">“I've lost fifty roubles to them just now.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span> had no luck, perhaps he'll be lucky this time,”</span> the Pole on the sofa observed in his direction.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“How much in the bank? To correspond?”</span> asked Mitya.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That's according, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>, maybe a hundred, maybe two hundred, as much as you will stake.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“A million!”</span> laughed Mitya.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“The Pan Captain has heard of Pan Podvysotsky, perhaps?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What Podvysotsky?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“In Warsaw there was a bank and any one comes and stakes against it. Podvysotsky comes, sees a thousand gold pieces, stakes against the bank. The banker says, <span class="tei tei-q">‘<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Panie</span></span> Podvysotsky, are you laying down the gold, or must we trust to your honor?’</span> <span class="tei tei-q">‘To my honor, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,’</span> says Podvysotsky. <span class="tei tei-q">‘So much the better.’</span> The banker throws the dice. Podvysotsky wins. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Take it, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,’</span> says the banker, and pulling out the drawer he gives him a million. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Take it, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>, this is your gain.’</span> There was a million in the bank. <span class="tei tei-q">‘I didn't know that,’</span> says Podvysotsky. <span class="tei tei-q">‘<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Panie</span></span> Podvysotsky,’</span> said the banker, <span class="tei tei-q">‘you pledged your honor and we pledged ours.’</span> Podvysotsky took the million.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“That's not true,”</span> said Kalganov.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Panie</span></span> Kalganov, in gentlemanly society one doesn't say such things.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“As if a Polish gambler would give away a million!”</span> cried Mitya, but checked himself at once. <span class="tei tei-q">“Forgive me, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>, it's my fault again, he would, he would give away a million, for honor, for Polish honor. You see how I talk Polish, ha ha! Here, I stake ten roubles, the knave leads.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And I put a rouble on the queen, the queen of hearts, the pretty little <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panienotchka</span></span>, he he!”</span> laughed Maximov, pulling out his queen, and, as though trying to conceal it from every one, he moved right up and crossed himself hurriedly under the table. Mitya won. The rouble won, too.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“A corner!”</span> cried Mitya.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I'll bet another rouble, a <span class="tei tei-q">‘single’</span> stake,”</span> Maximov muttered gleefully, hugely delighted at having won a rouble.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Lost!”</span> shouted Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“A <span class="tei tei-q">‘double’</span> on the seven!”</span></p>
					<p>The seven too was trumped.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Stop!”</span> cried Kalganov suddenly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Double! Double!”</span> Mitya doubled his stakes, and each time he doubled the stake, the card he doubled was trumped by the Poles. The rouble stakes kept winning.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“On the double!”</span> shouted Mitya furiously.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“You've lost two hundred, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>. Will you stake another hundred?”</span> the Pole on the sofa inquired.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What? Lost two hundred already? Then another two hundred! All doubles!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>And pulling his money out of his pocket, Mitya was about to fling two hundred roubles on the queen, but Kalganov covered it with his hand.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“That's enough!”</span> he shouted in his ringing voice.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What's the matter?”</span> Mitya stared at him.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That's enough! I don't want you to play any more. Don't!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Why?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Because I don't. Hang it, come away. That's why. I won't let you go on playing.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Mitya gazed at him in astonishment.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Give it up, Mitya. He may be right. You've lost a lot as it is,”</span> said Grushenka, with a curious note in her voice. Both the Poles rose from their seats with a deeply offended air.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Are you joking, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>?”</span> said the short man, looking severely at Kalganov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“How dare you!”</span> Pan Vrublevsky, too, growled at Kalganov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't dare to shout like that,”</span> cried Grushenka. <span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, you turkey-cocks!”</span></p>
					<p>Mitya looked at each of them in turn. But something in Grushenka's face suddenly struck him, and at the same instant something new flashed into his mind—a strange new thought!</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pani</span></span> Agrippina,”</span> the little Pole was beginning, crimson with anger, when Mitya suddenly went up to him and slapped him on the shoulder.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Most illustrious, two words with you.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What do you want?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“In the next room, I've two words to say to you, something pleasant, very pleasant. You'll be glad to hear it.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>The little <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span> was taken aback and looked apprehensively at Mitya. He agreed at once, however, on condition that Pan Vrublevsky went with them.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The bodyguard? Let him come, and I want him, too. I must have him!”</span> cried Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“March, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie</span></span>!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Where are you going?”</span> asked Grushenka, anxiously.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“We'll be back in one moment,”</span> answered Mitya.</p>
					<p>There was a sort of boldness, a sudden confidence shining in his eyes. His face had looked very different when he entered the room an hour before.</p>
					<p>He led the Poles, not into the large room where the chorus of girls was assembling and the table was being laid, but into the bedroom on the right, where the trunks and packages were kept, and there were two large beds, with pyramids of cotton pillows on each. There was a lighted candle on a small deal table in the corner. The small man and Mitya sat down to this table, facing each other, while the huge Vrublevsky stood beside them, his hands behind his back. The Poles looked severe but were evidently inquisitive.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What can I do for you, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>?”</span> lisped the little Pole.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, look here, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>, I won't keep you long. There's money for you,”</span> he pulled out his notes. <span class="tei tei-q">“Would you like three thousand? Take it and go your way.”</span></p>
					<p>The Pole gazed open-eyed at Mitya, with a searching look.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Three thousand, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>?”</span> He exchanged glances with Vrublevsky.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Three, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panovie</span></span>, three! Listen, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>, I see you're a sensible man. Take three thousand and go to the devil, and Vrublevsky with you—d'you hear? But, at once, this very minute, and for ever. You understand that, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>, for ever. Here's the door, you go out of it. What have you got there, a great-coat, a fur coat? I'll bring it out to you. They'll get the horses out directly, and then—good-by, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Mitya awaited an answer with assurance. He had no doubts. An expression of extraordinary resolution passed over the Pole's face.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And the money, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The money, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>? Five hundred roubles I'll give you this moment for the journey, and as a first installment, and two thousand five hundred to-morrow, in the town—I swear on my honor, I'll get it, I'll get it at any cost!”</span> cried Mitya.</p>
					<p>The Poles exchanged glances again. The short man's face looked more forbidding.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Seven hundred, seven hundred, not five hundred, at once, this minute, cash down!”</span> Mitya added, feeling something wrong. <span class="tei tei-q">“What's the matter, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>? Don't you trust me? I can't give you the whole three thousand straight off. If I give it, you may come back to her to-morrow.... Besides, I haven't the three thousand with me. I've got it at home in the town,”</span> faltered Mitya, his spirit sinking at every word he uttered. <span class="tei tei-q">“Upon my word, the money's there, hidden.”</span></p>
					<p>In an instant an extraordinary sense of personal dignity showed itself in the little man's face.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What next?”</span> he asked ironically. <span class="tei tei-q">“For shame!”</span> and he spat on the floor. Pan Vrublevsky spat too.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“You do that, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">panie</span></span>,”</span> said Mitya, recognizing with despair that all was over, <span class="tei tei-q">“because you hope to make more out of Grushenka? You're a couple of capons, that's what you are!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“This is a mortal insult!”</span> The little Pole turned as red as a crab, and he went out of the room, briskly, as though unwilling to hear another word. Vrublevsky swung out after him, and Mitya followed, confused and crestfallen. He was afraid of Grushenka, afraid that the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span> would at once raise an outcry. And so indeed he did. The Pole walked into the room and threw himself in a theatrical attitude before Grushenka.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pani</span></span> Agrippina, I have received a mortal insult!”</span> he exclaimed. But Grushenka suddenly lost all patience, as though they had wounded her in the tenderest spot.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Speak Russian! Speak Russian!”</span> she cried, <span class="tei tei-q">“not another word of Polish! You used to talk Russian. You can't have forgotten it in five years.”</span></p>
					<p>She was red with passion.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pani</span></span> Agrippina—”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“My name's Agrafena, Grushenka, speak Russian or I won't listen!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>The Pole gasped with offended dignity, and quickly and pompously delivered himself in broken Russian:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pani</span></span> Agrafena, I came here to forget the past and forgive it, to forget all that has happened till to-day—”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Forgive? Came here to forgive me?”</span> Grushenka cut him short, jumping up from her seat.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Just so, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pani</span></span>, I'm not pusillanimous, I'm magnanimous. But I was astounded when I saw your lovers. Pan Mitya offered me three thousand, in the other room to depart. I spat in the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pan's</span></span> face.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What? He offered you money for me?”</span> cried Grushenka, hysterically. <span class="tei tei-q">“Is it true, Mitya? How dare you? Am I for sale?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Panie, panie!</span></span>”</span> yelled Mitya, <span class="tei tei-q">“she's pure and shining, and I have never been her lover! That's a lie....”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“How dare you defend me to him?”</span> shrieked Grushenka. <span class="tei tei-q">“It wasn't virtue kept me pure, and it wasn't that I was afraid of Kuzma, but that I might hold up my head when I met him, and tell him he's a scoundrel. And he did actually refuse the money?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He took it! He took it!”</span> cried Mitya; <span class="tei tei-q">“only he wanted to get the whole three thousand at once, and I could only give him seven hundred straight off.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I see: he heard I had money, and came here to marry me!”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pani</span></span> Agrippina!”</span> cried the little Pole. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'm—a knight, I'm—a nobleman, and not a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">lajdak</span></span>. I came here to make you my wife and I find you a different woman, perverse and shameless.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, go back where you came from! I'll tell them to turn you out and you'll be turned out,”</span> cried Grushenka, furious. <span class="tei tei-q">“I've been a fool, a fool, to have been miserable these five years! And it wasn't for his sake, it was my anger made me miserable. And this isn't he at all! Was he like this? It might be his father! Where did you get your wig from? He was a falcon, but this is a gander. He used to laugh and sing to me.... And I've been crying for five years, damned fool, abject, shameless I was!”</span></p>
					<p>She sank back in her low chair and hid her face in her hands. At that instant the chorus of Mokroe began singing in the room on the left—a rollicking dance song.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“A regular Sodom!”</span> Vrublevsky roared suddenly. <span class="tei tei-q">“Landlord, send the shameless hussies away!”</span></p>
					<p>The landlord, who had been for some time past inquisitively peeping in at the door, hearing shouts and guessing that his guests were quarreling, at once entered the room.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What are you shouting for? D'you want to split your throat?”</span> he said, addressing Vrublevsky, with surprising rudeness.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Animal!”</span> bellowed Pan Vrublevsky.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Animal? And what sort of cards were you playing with just now? I gave you a pack and you hid it. You played with marked cards! I could send you to Siberia for playing with false cards, d'you know that, for it's just the same as false banknotes....”</span>
					</p>
					<p>And going up to the sofa he thrust his fingers between the sofa back and the cushion, and pulled out an unopened pack of cards.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Here's my pack unopened!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>He held it up and showed it to all in the room. <span class="tei tei-q">“From where I stood I saw him slip my pack away, and put his in place of it—you're a cheat and not a gentleman!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And I twice saw the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span> change a card!”</span> cried Kalganov.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“How shameful! How shameful!”</span> exclaimed Grushenka, clasping her hands, and blushing for genuine shame. <span class="tei tei-q">“Good Lord, he's come to that!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I thought so, too!”</span> said Mitya. But before he had uttered the words, Vrublevsky, with a confused and infuriated face, shook his fist at Grushenka, shouting:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You low harlot!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Mitya flew at him at once, clutched him in both hands, lifted him in the air, and in one instant had carried him into the room on the right, from which they had just come.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I've laid him on the floor, there,”</span> he announced, returning at once, gasping with excitement. <span class="tei tei-q">“He's struggling, the scoundrel! But he won't come back, no fear of that!...”</span></p>
					<p>He closed one half of the folding doors, and holding the other ajar called out to the little Pole:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Most illustrious, will you be pleased to retire as well?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“My dear Dmitri Fyodorovitch,”</span> said Trifon Borissovitch, <span class="tei tei-q">“make them give you back the money you lost. It's as good as stolen from you.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't want my fifty roubles back,”</span> Kalganov declared suddenly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't want my two hundred, either,”</span> cried Mitya, <span class="tei tei-q">“I wouldn't take it for anything! Let him keep it as a consolation.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Bravo, Mitya! You're a trump, Mitya!”</span> cried Grushenka, and there was a note of fierce anger in the exclamation.</p>
					<p>The little <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pan</span></span>, crimson with fury but still mindful of his dignity, was making for the door, but he stopped short and said suddenly, addressing Grushenka:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pani</span></span>, if you want to come with me, come. If not, good-by.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>And swelling with indignation and importance he went to the door. This was a man of character: he had so good an opinion of himself that after all that had passed, he still expected that she would marry him. Mitya slammed the door after him.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Lock it,”</span> said Kalganov. But the key clicked on the other side, they had locked it from within.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“That's capital!”</span> exclaimed Grushenka relentlessly. <span class="tei tei-q">“Serve them right!”</span></p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
