<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-4-1" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-4-1-1" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter I. Kolya
            Krassotkin</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was the
            beginning of November. There had been a hard frost, eleven
            degrees Réaumur, without snow, but a little dry snow had fallen
            on the frozen ground during the night, and a keen dry wind was
            lifting and blowing it along the dreary streets of our town,
            especially about the market-place. It was a dull morning, but the
            snow had ceased.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Not far from
            the market-place, close to Plotnikov's shop, there stood a small
            house, very clean both without and within. It belonged to Madame
            Krassotkin, the widow of a former provincial secretary, who had
            been dead for fourteen years. His widow, still a nice-looking
            woman of thirty-two, was living in her neat little house on her
            private means. She lived in respectable seclusion; she was of a
            soft but fairly cheerful disposition. She was about eighteen at
            the time of her husband's death; she had been married only a year
            and had just borne him a son. From the day of his death she had
            devoted herself heart and soul to the bringing up of her precious
            treasure, her boy Kolya. Though she had loved him passionately
            those fourteen years, he had caused her far more suffering than
            happiness. She had been trembling and fainting with terror almost
            every day, afraid he would fall ill, would catch cold, do
            something naughty, climb on a chair and fall off it, and so on
            and so on. When Kolya began going to school, the mother devoted
            herself to studying all the sciences with him so as to help him,
            and go through his lessons with him. She hastened to make the
            acquaintance of the teachers and their wives, even made up to
            Kolya's schoolfellows, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page579">[pg
            579]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg579" name="Pg579"></a>
            and fawned upon them in the hope of thus saving Kolya from being
            teased, laughed at, or beaten by them. She went so far that the
            boys actually began to mock at him on her account and taunt him
            with being a <span class="tei tei-q">“mother's
            darling.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the boy
            could take his own part. He was a resolute boy, <span class="tei tei-q">“tremendously strong,”</span> as was rumored in his
            class, and soon proved to be the fact; he was agile,
            strong-willed, and of an audacious and enterprising temper. He
            was good at lessons, and there was a rumor in the school that he
            could beat the teacher, Dardanelov, at arithmetic and universal
            history. Though he looked down upon every one, he was a good
            comrade and not supercilious. He accepted his schoolfellows'
            respect as his due, but was friendly with them. Above all, he
            knew where to draw the line. He could restrain himself on
            occasion, and in his relations with the teachers he never
            overstepped that last mystic limit beyond which a prank becomes
            an unpardonable breach of discipline. But he was as fond of
            mischief on every possible occasion as the smallest boy in the
            school, and not so much for the sake of mischief as for creating
            a sensation, inventing something, something effective and
            conspicuous. He was extremely vain. He knew how to make even his
            mother give way to him; he was almost despotic in his control of
            her. She gave way to him, oh, she had given way to him for years.
            The one thought unendurable to her was that her boy had no great
            love for her. She was always fancying that Kolya was <span class="tei tei-q">“unfeeling”</span> to her, and at times, dissolving
            into hysterical tears, she used to reproach him with his
            coldness. The boy disliked this, and the more demonstrations of
            feeling were demanded of him the more he seemed intentionally to
            avoid them. Yet it was not intentional on his part but
            instinctive—it was his character. His mother was mistaken; he was
            very fond of her. He only disliked <span class="tei tei-q">“sheepish sentimentality,”</span> as he expressed it
            in his schoolboy language.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was a
            bookcase in the house containing a few books that had been his
            father's. Kolya was fond of reading, and had read several of them
            by himself. His mother did not mind that and only wondered
            sometimes at seeing the boy stand for hours by the bookcase
            poring over a book instead of going to play. And in that way
            Kolya read some things unsuitable for his age.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Though the
            boy, as a rule, knew where to draw the line in his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page580">[pg 580]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg580" name="Pg580"></a> mischief, he had of late
            begun to play pranks that caused his mother serious alarm. It is
            true there was nothing vicious in what he did, but a wild mad
            recklessness.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It happened
            that July, during the summer holidays, that the mother and son
            went to another district, forty-five miles away, to spend a week
            with a distant relation, whose husband was an official at the
            railway station (the very station, the nearest one to our town,
            from which a month later Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov set off for
            Moscow). There Kolya began by carefully investigating every
            detail connected with the railways, knowing that he could impress
            his schoolfellows when he got home with his newly acquired
            knowledge. But there happened to be some other boys in the place
            with whom he soon made friends. Some of them were living at the
            station, others in the neighborhood; there were six or seven of
            them, all between twelve and fifteen, and two of them came from
            our town. The boys played together, and on the fourth or fifth
            day of Kolya's stay at the station, a mad bet was made by the
            foolish boys. Kolya, who was almost the youngest of the party and
            rather looked down upon by the others in consequence, was moved
            by vanity or by reckless bravado to bet them two roubles that he
            would lie down between the rails at night when the eleven o'clock
            train was due, and would lie there without moving while the train
            rolled over him at full speed. It is true they made a preliminary
            investigation, from which it appeared that it was possible to lie
            so flat between the rails that the train could pass over without
            touching, but to lie there was no joke! Kolya maintained stoutly
            that he would. At first they laughed at him, called him a little
            liar, a braggart, but that only egged him on. What piqued him
            most was that these boys of fifteen turned up their noses at him
            too superciliously, and were at first disposed to treat him as
            <span class="tei tei-q">“a small boy,”</span> not fit to
            associate with them, and that was an unendurable insult.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And so it was
            resolved to go in the evening, half a mile from the station, so
            that the train might have time to get up full speed after leaving
            the station. The boys assembled. It was a pitch-dark night
            without a moon. At the time fixed, Kolya lay down between the
            rails. The five others who had taken the bet waited among the
            bushes below the embankment, their hearts beating with suspense,
            which was followed by alarm and remorse. At last they
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page581">[pg 581]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg581" name="Pg581"></a> heard in the
            distance the rumble of the train leaving the station. Two red
            lights gleamed out of the darkness; the monster roared as it
            approached.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Run, run away from the rails,”</span> the boys cried
            to Kolya from the bushes, breathless with terror. But it was too
            late: the train darted up and flew past. The boys rushed to
            Kolya. He lay without moving. They began pulling at him, lifting
            him up. He suddenly got up and walked away without a word. Then
            he explained that he had lain there as though he were insensible
            to frighten them, but the fact was that he really had lost
            consciousness, as he confessed long after to his mother. In this
            way his reputation as <span class="tei tei-q">“a desperate
            character,”</span> was established for ever. He returned home to
            the station as white as a sheet. Next day he had a slight attack
            of nervous fever, but he was in high spirits and well pleased
            with himself. The incident did not become known at once, but when
            they came back to the town it penetrated to the school and even
            reached the ears of the masters. But then Kolya's mother hastened
            to entreat the masters on her boy's behalf, and in the end
            Dardanelov, a respected and influential teacher, exerted himself
            in his favor, and the affair was ignored.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Dardanelov was
            a middle-aged bachelor, who had been passionately in love with
            Madame Krassotkin for many years past, and had once already,
            about a year previously, ventured, trembling with fear and the
            delicacy of his sentiments, to offer her most respectfully his
            hand in marriage. But she refused him resolutely, feeling that to
            accept him would be an act of treachery to her son, though
            Dardanelov had, to judge from certain mysterious symptoms, reason
            for believing that he was not an object of aversion to the
            charming but too chaste and tender-hearted widow. Kolya's mad
            prank seemed to have broken the ice, and Dardanelov was rewarded
            for his intercession by a suggestion of hope. The suggestion, it
            is true, was a faint one, but then Dardanelov was such a paragon
            of purity and delicacy that it was enough for the time being to
            make him perfectly happy. He was fond of the boy, though he would
            have felt it beneath him to try and win him over, and was severe
            and strict with him in class. Kolya, too, kept him at a
            respectful distance. He learned his lessons perfectly; he was
            second in his class, was reserved with Dardanelov, and the whole
            class firmly believed that <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page582">[pg 582]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg582" name="Pg582"></a> Kolya was so good at universal history that
            he could <span class="tei tei-q">“beat”</span> even Dardanelov.
            Kolya did indeed ask him the question, <span class="tei tei-q">“Who founded Troy?”</span> to which Dardanelov had
            made a very vague reply, referring to the movements and
            migrations of races, to the remoteness of the period, to the
            mythical legends. But the question, <span class="tei tei-q">“Who
            had founded Troy?”</span> that is, what individuals, he could not
            answer, and even for some reason regarded the question as idle
            and frivolous. But the boys remained convinced that Dardanelov
            did not know who founded Troy. Kolya had read of the founders of
            Troy in Smaragdov, whose history was among the books in his
            father's bookcase. In the end all the boys became interested in
            the question, who it was that had founded Troy, but Krassotkin
            would not tell his secret, and his reputation for knowledge
            remained unshaken.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After the
            incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya's
            attitude to his mother. When Anna Fyodorovna (Madame Krassotkin)
            heard of her son's exploit, she almost went out of her mind with
            horror. She had such terrible attacks of hysterics, lasting with
            intervals for several days, that Kolya, seriously alarmed at
            last, promised on his honor that such pranks should never be
            repeated. He swore on his knees before the holy image, and swore
            by the memory of his father, at Madame Krassotkin's instance, and
            the <span class="tei tei-q">“manly”</span> Kolya burst into tears
            like a boy of six. And all that day the mother and son were
            constantly rushing into each other's arms sobbing. Next day Kolya
            woke up as <span class="tei tei-q">“unfeeling”</span> as before,
            but he had become more silent, more modest, sterner, and more
            thoughtful.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Six weeks
            later, it is true, he got into another scrape, which even brought
            his name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace, but it was a
            scrape of quite another kind, amusing, foolish, and he did not,
            as it turned out, take the leading part in it, but was only
            implicated in it. But of this later. His mother still fretted and
            trembled, but the more uneasy she became, the greater were the
            hopes of Dardanelov. It must be noted that Kolya understood and
            divined what was in Dardanelov's heart and, of course, despised
            him profoundly for his <span class="tei tei-q">“feelings”</span>;
            he had in the past been so tactless as to show this contempt
            before his mother, hinting vaguely that he knew what Dardanelov
            was after. But from the time of the railway incident his behavior
            in this respect also was changed; he did not allow himself the
            remotest allusion to the subject and began to speak more
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page583">[pg 583]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg583" name="Pg583"></a> respectfully of
            Dardanelov before his mother, which the sensitive woman at once
            appreciated with boundless gratitude. But at the slightest
            mention of Dardanelov by a visitor in Kolya's presence, she would
            flush as pink as a rose. At such moments Kolya would either stare
            out of the window scowling, or would investigate the state of his
            boots, or would shout angrily for <span class="tei tei-q">“Perezvon,”</span> the big, shaggy, mangy dog, which
            he had picked up a month before, brought home, and kept for some
            reason secretly indoors, not showing him to any of his
            schoolfellows. He bullied him frightfully, teaching him all sorts
            of tricks, so that the poor dog howled for him whenever he was
            absent at school, and when he came in, whined with delight,
            rushed about as if he were crazy, begged, lay down on the ground
            pretending to be dead, and so on; in fact, showed all the tricks
            he had taught him, not at the word of command, but simply from
            the zeal of his excited and grateful heart.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I have
            forgotten, by the way, to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the
            boy stabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the
            reader as the son of Captain Snegiryov. Ilusha had been defending
            his father when the schoolboys jeered at him, shouting the
            nickname <span class="tei tei-q">“wisp of tow.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 3.00em; margin-bottom: 3.00em">
<a id="toc155" name="toc155"></a> <a id="pdf156" name="pdf156"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
