<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="book-1-3" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-1-3-8" epub:type="chapter">
					<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter VIII. Over The Brandy</span>
					</h3>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The controversy was over. But, strange to say, Fyodor Pavlovitch, who had been so gay, suddenly began frowning. He frowned and gulped brandy, and it was already a glass too much.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Get along with you, Jesuits!”</span> he cried to the servants. <span class="tei tei-q">“Go away, Smerdyakov. I'll send you the gold piece I promised you to-day, but be off! Don't cry, Grigory. Go to Marfa. She'll comfort you and put you to bed. The rascals won't let us sit in peace after dinner,”</span> he snapped peevishly, as the servants promptly withdrew at his word.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Smerdyakov always pokes himself in now, after dinner. It's <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page143">[pg 143]</span> <a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg143" name="Pg143"/> you he's so interested in. What have you done to fascinate him?”</span> he added to Ivan.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nothing whatever,”</span> answered Ivan. <span class="tei tei-q">“He's pleased to have a high opinion of me; he's a lackey and a mean soul. Raw material for revolution, however, when the time comes.”</span></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“For revolution?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“There will be others and better ones. But there will be some like him as well. His kind will come first, and better ones after.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And when will the time come?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“The rocket will go off and fizzle out, perhaps. The peasants are not very fond of listening to these soup-makers, so far.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, brother, but a Balaam's ass like that thinks and thinks, and the devil knows where he gets to.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He's storing up ideas,”</span> said Ivan, smiling.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You see, I know he can't bear me, nor any one else, even you, though you fancy that he has a high opinion of you. Worse still with Alyosha, he despises Alyosha. But he doesn't steal, that's one thing, and he's not a gossip, he holds his tongue, and doesn't wash our dirty linen in public. He makes capital fish pasties too. But, damn him, is he worth talking about so much?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Of course he isn't.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And as for the ideas he may be hatching, the Russian peasant, generally speaking, needs thrashing. That I've always maintained. Our peasants are swindlers, and don't deserve to be pitied, and it's a good thing they're still flogged sometimes. Russia is rich in birches. If they destroyed the forests, it would be the ruin of Russia. I stand up for the clever people. We've left off thrashing the peasants, we've grown so clever, but they go on thrashing themselves. And a good thing too. <span class="tei tei-q">‘For with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again,’</span> or how does it go? Anyhow, it will be measured. But Russia's all swinishness. My dear, if you only knew how I hate Russia.... That is, not Russia, but all this vice! But maybe I mean Russia. <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">Tout cela c'est de la cochonnerie</span></span>.... Do you know what I like? I like wit.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You've had another glass. That's enough.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Wait a bit. I'll have one more, and then another, and then I'll stop. No, stay, you interrupted me. At Mokroe I was talking to an old man, and he told me: <span class="tei tei-q">‘There's nothing we like so much as <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page144">[pg 144]</span> <a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg144" name="Pg144"/> sentencing girls to be thrashed, and we always give the lads the job of thrashing them. And the girl he has thrashed to-day, the young man will ask in marriage to-morrow. So it quite suits the girls, too,’</span> he said. There's a set of de Sades for you! But it's clever, anyway. Shall we go over and have a look at it, eh? Alyosha, are you blushing? Don't be bashful, child. I'm sorry I didn't stay to dinner at the Superior's and tell the monks about the girls at Mokroe. Alyosha, don't be angry that I offended your Superior this morning. I lost my temper. If there is a God, if He exists, then, of course, I'm to blame, and I shall have to answer for it. But if there isn't a God at all, what do they deserve, your fathers? It's not enough to cut their heads off, for they keep back progress. Would you believe it, Ivan, that that lacerates my sentiments? No, you don't believe it as I see from your eyes. You believe what people say, that I'm nothing but a buffoon. Alyosha, do you believe that I'm nothing but a buffoon?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No, I don't believe it.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And I believe you don't, and that you speak the truth. You look sincere and you speak sincerely. But not Ivan. Ivan's supercilious.... I'd make an end of your monks, though, all the same. I'd take all that mystic stuff and suppress it, once for all, all over Russia, so as to bring all the fools to reason. And the gold and the silver that would flow into the mint!”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But why suppress it?”</span> asked Ivan.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That Truth may prevail. That's why.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Well, if Truth were to prevail, you know, you'd be the first to be robbed and suppressed.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah! I dare say you're right. Ah, I'm an ass!”</span> burst out Fyodor Pavlovitch, striking himself lightly on the forehead. <span class="tei tei-q">“Well, your monastery may stand then, Alyosha, if that's how it is. And we clever people will sit snug and enjoy our brandy. You know, Ivan, it must have been so ordained by the Almighty Himself. Ivan, speak, is there a God or not? Stay, speak the truth, speak seriously. Why are you laughing again?”</span></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I'm laughing that you should have made a clever remark just now about Smerdyakov's belief in the existence of two saints who could move mountains.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Why, am I like him now, then?”</span>
					</p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page145">[pg 145]</span>
					<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg145" name="Pg145"/>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Very much.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Well, that shows I'm a Russian, too, and I have a Russian characteristic. And you may be caught in the same way, though you are a philosopher. Shall I catch you? What do you bet that I'll catch you to-morrow. Speak, all the same, is there a God, or not? Only, be serious. I want you to be serious now.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No, there is no God.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, is there a God?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“There is.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Ivan, and is there immortality of some sort, just a little, just a tiny bit?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“There is no immortality either.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“None at all?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“None at all.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“There's absolute nothingness then. Perhaps there is just something? Anything is better than nothing!”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Absolute nothingness.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, is there immortality?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“There is.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“God and immortality?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“God and immortality. In God is immortality.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“H'm! It's more likely Ivan's right. Good Lord! to think what faith, what force of all kinds, man has lavished for nothing, on that dream, and for how many thousand years. Who is it laughing at man? Ivan! For the last time, once for all, is there a God or not? I ask for the last time!”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And for the last time there is not.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Who is laughing at mankind, Ivan?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It must be the devil,”</span> said Ivan, smiling.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And the devil? Does he exist?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No, there's no devil either.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“It's a pity. Damn it all, what wouldn't I do to the man who first invented God! Hanging on a bitter aspen tree would be too good for him.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“There would have been no civilization if they hadn't invented God.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Wouldn't there have been? Without God?”</span>
					</p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page146">[pg 146]</span>
					<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg146" name="Pg146"/>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No. And there would have been no brandy either. But I must take your brandy away from you, anyway.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Stop, stop, stop, dear boy, one more little glass. I've hurt Alyosha's feelings. You're not angry with me, Alyosha? My dear little Alexey!”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No, I am not angry. I know your thoughts. Your heart is better than your head.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“My heart better than my head, is it? Oh, Lord! And that from you. Ivan, do you love Alyosha?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You must love him”</span> (Fyodor Pavlovitch was by this time very drunk). <span class="tei tei-q">“Listen, Alyosha, I was rude to your elder this morning. But I was excited. But there's wit in that elder, don't you think, Ivan?”</span></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Very likely.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“There is, there is. <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">Il y a du Piron lÃ -dedans.</span></span> He's a Jesuit, a Russian one, that is. As he's an honorable person there's a hidden indignation boiling within him at having to pretend and affect holiness.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“But, of course, he believes in God.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Not a bit of it. Didn't you know? Why, he tells every one so, himself. That is, not every one, but all the clever people who come to him. He said straight out to Governor Schultz not long ago: <span class="tei tei-q">‘<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Credo</span></span>, but I don't know in what.’</span> ”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Really?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“He really did. But I respect him. There's something of Mephistopheles about him, or rather of <span class="tei tei-q">‘The hero of our time’</span> ... Arbenin, or what's his name?... You see, he's a sensualist. He's such a sensualist that I should be afraid for my daughter or my wife if she went to confess to him. You know, when he begins telling stories.... The year before last he invited us to tea, tea with liqueur (the ladies send him liqueur), and began telling us about old times till we nearly split our sides.... Especially how he once cured a paralyzed woman. <span class="tei tei-q">‘If my legs were not bad I know a dance I could dance you,’</span> he said. What do you say to that? <span class="tei tei-q">‘I've plenty of tricks in my time,’</span> said he. He did Dernidov, the merchant, out of sixty thousand.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What, he stole it?”</span>
					</p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page147">[pg 147]</span>
					<a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg147" name="Pg147"/>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“He brought him the money as a man he could trust, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Take care of it for me, friend, there'll be a police search at my place to-morrow.’</span> And he kept it. <span class="tei tei-q">‘You have given it to the Church,’</span> he declared. I said to him: <span class="tei tei-q">‘You're a scoundrel,’</span> I said. <span class="tei tei-q">‘No,’</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I'm not a scoundrel, but I'm broad-minded.’</span> But that wasn't he, that was some one else. I've muddled him with some one else ... without noticing it. Come, another glass and that's enough. Take away the bottle, Ivan. I've been telling lies. Why didn't you stop me, Ivan, and tell me I was lying?”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I knew you'd stop of yourself.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That's a lie. You did it from spite, from simple spite against me. You despise me. You have come to me and despised me in my own house.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Well, I'm going away. You've had too much brandy.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I've begged you for Christ's sake to go to Tchermashnya for a day or two, and you don't go.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I'll go to-morrow if you're so set upon it.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You won't go. You want to keep an eye on me. That's what you want, spiteful fellow. That's why you won't go.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The old man persisted. He had reached that state of drunkenness when the drunkard who has till then been inoffensive tries to pick a quarrel and to assert himself.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Why are you looking at me? Why do you look like that? Your eyes look at me and say, <span class="tei tei-q">‘You ugly drunkard!’</span> Your eyes are mistrustful. They're contemptuous.... You've come here with some design. Alyosha, here, looks at me and his eyes shine. Alyosha doesn't despise me. Alexey, you mustn't love Ivan.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't be ill-tempered with my brother. Leave off attacking him,”</span> Alyosha said emphatically.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, all right. Ugh, my head aches. Take away the brandy, Ivan. It's the third time I've told you.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He mused, and suddenly a slow, cunning grin spread over his face.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Don't be angry with a feeble old man, Ivan. I know you don't love me, but don't be angry all the same. You've nothing to love me for. You go to Tchermashnya. I'll come to you myself and bring you a present. I'll show you a little wench there. I've had my eye on her a long time. She's still running about bare-foot. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page148">[pg 148]</span> <a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg148" name="Pg148"/> Don't be afraid of bare-footed wenches—don't despise them—they're pearls!”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And he kissed his hand with a smack.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To my thinking,”</span> he revived at once, seeming to grow sober the instant he touched on his favorite topic. <span class="tei tei-q">“To my thinking ... Ah, you boys! You children, little sucking-pigs, to my thinking ... I never thought a woman ugly in my life—that's been my rule! Can you understand that? How could you understand it? You've milk in your veins, not blood. You're not out of your shells yet. My rule has been that you can always find something devilishly interesting in every woman that you wouldn't find in any other. Only, one must know how to find it, that's the point! That's a talent! To my mind there are no ugly women. The very fact that she is a woman is half the battle ... but how could you understand that? Even in <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">vieilles filles</span></span>, even in them you may discover something that makes you simply wonder that men have been such fools as to let them grow old without noticing them. Bare-footed girls or unattractive ones, you must take by surprise. Didn't you know that? You must astound them till they're fascinated, upset, ashamed that such a gentleman should fall in love with such a little slut. It's a jolly good thing that there always are and will be masters and slaves in the world, so there always will be a little maid-of-all-work and her master, and you know, that's all that's needed for happiness. Stay ... listen, Alyosha, I always used to surprise your mother, but in a different way. I paid no attention to her at all, but all at once, when the minute came, I'd be all devotion to her, crawl on my knees, kiss her feet, and I always, always—I remember it as though it were to-day—reduced her to that tinkling, quiet, nervous, queer little laugh. It was peculiar to her. I knew her attacks always used to begin like that. The next day she would begin shrieking hysterically, and this little laugh was not a sign of delight, though it made a very good counterfeit. That's the great thing, to know how to take every one. Once Belyavsky—he was a handsome fellow, and rich—used to like to come here and hang about her—suddenly gave me a slap in the face in her presence. And she—such a mild sheep—why, I thought she would have knocked me down for that blow. How she set on me! <span class="tei tei-q">‘You're beaten, beaten now,’</span> she said. <span class="tei tei-q">‘You've taken a blow from him. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page149">[pg 149]</span> <a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg149" name="Pg149"/> You have been trying to sell me to him,’</span> she said.... <span class="tei tei-q">‘And how dared he strike you in my presence! Don't dare come near me again, never, never! Run at once, challenge him to a duel!’</span>... I took her to the monastery then to bring her to her senses. The holy Fathers prayed her back to reason. But I swear, by God, Alyosha, I never insulted the poor crazy girl! Only once, perhaps, in the first year; then she was very fond of praying. She used to keep the feasts of Our Lady particularly and used to turn me out of her room then. I'll knock that mysticism out of her, thought I! <span class="tei tei-q">‘Here,’</span> said I, <span class="tei tei-q">‘you see your holy image. Here it is. Here I take it down. You believe it's miraculous, but here, I'll spit on it directly and nothing will happen to me for it!’</span>... When she saw it, good Lord! I thought she would kill me. But she only jumped up, wrung her hands, then suddenly hid her face in them, began trembling all over and fell on the floor ... fell all of a heap. Alyosha, Alyosha, what's the matter?”</span></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The old man jumped up in alarm. From the time he had begun speaking about his mother, a change had gradually come over Alyosha's face. He flushed crimson, his eyes glowed, his lips quivered. The old sot had gone spluttering on, noticing nothing, till the moment when something very strange happened to Alyosha. Precisely what he was describing in the crazy woman was suddenly repeated with Alyosha. He jumped up from his seat exactly as his mother was said to have done, wrung his hands, hid his face in them, and fell back in his chair, shaking all over in an hysterical paroxysm of sudden violent, silent weeping. His extraordinary resemblance to his mother particularly impressed the old man.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ivan, Ivan! Water, quickly! It's like her, exactly as she used to be then, his mother. Spurt some water on him from your mouth, that's what I used to do to her. He's upset about his mother, his mother,”</span> he muttered to Ivan.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But she was my mother, too, I believe, his mother. Was she not?”</span> said Ivan, with uncontrolled anger and contempt. The old man shrank before his flashing eyes. But something very strange had happened, though only for a second; it seemed really to have escaped the old man's mind that Alyosha's mother actually was the mother of Ivan too.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Your mother?”</span> he muttered, not understanding. <span class="tei tei-q">“What do <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page150">[pg 150]</span> <a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg150" name="Pg150"/> you mean? What mother are you talking about? Was she?... Why, damn it! of course she was yours too! Damn it! My mind has never been so darkened before. Excuse me, why, I was thinking, Ivan.... He he he!”</span> He stopped. A broad, drunken, half-senseless grin overspread his face.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that moment a fearful noise and clamor was heard in the hall, there were violent shouts, the door was flung open, and Dmitri burst into the room. The old man rushed to Ivan in terror.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He'll kill me! He'll kill me! Don't let him get at me!”</span> he screamed, clinging to the skirt of Ivan's coat.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
