<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-1-3" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-1-3-9" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.40em; margin-top: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter IX. The
            Sensualists</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Grigory and
            Smerdyakov ran into the room after Dmitri. They had been
            struggling with him in the passage, refusing to admit him, acting
            on instructions given them by Fyodor Pavlovitch some days before.
            Taking advantage of the fact that Dmitri stopped a moment on
            entering the room to look about him, Grigory ran round the table,
            closed the double doors on the opposite side of the room leading
            to the inner apartments, and stood before the closed doors,
            stretching wide his arms, prepared to defend the entrance, so to
            speak, with the last drop of his blood. Seeing this, Dmitri
            uttered a scream rather than a shout and rushed at Grigory.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then she's there! She's hidden there! Out of the
            way, scoundrel!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He tried to
            pull Grigory away, but the old servant pushed him back. Beside
            himself with fury, Dmitri struck out, and hit Grigory with all
            his might. The old man fell like a log, and Dmitri, leaping over
            him, broke in the door. Smerdyakov remained pale and trembling at
            the other end of the room, huddling close to Fyodor
            Pavlovitch.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She's here!”</span> shouted Dmitri. <span class="tei tei-q">“I saw her turn towards the house just now, but I
            couldn't catch her. Where is she? Where is she?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">That shout,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“She's here!”</span> produced an
            indescribable effect on Fyodor Pavlovitch. All his terror left
            him.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page151">[pg
            151]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg151" name="Pg151"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Hold him! Hold him!”</span> he cried, and dashed
            after Dmitri. Meanwhile Grigory had got up from the floor, but
            still seemed stunned. Ivan and Alyosha ran after their father. In
            the third room something was heard to fall on the floor with a
            ringing crash: it was a large glass vase—not an expensive one—on
            a marble pedestal which Dmitri had upset as he ran past it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“At him!”</span> shouted the old man. <span class="tei tei-q">“Help!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan and
            Alyosha caught the old man and were forcibly bringing him
            back.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why do you run after him? He'll murder you
            outright,”</span> Ivan cried wrathfully at his father.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ivan! Alyosha! She must be here. Grushenka's here.
            He said he saw her himself, running.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He was
            choking. He was not expecting Grushenka at the time, and the
            sudden news that she was here made him beside himself. He was
            trembling all over. He seemed frantic.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But you've seen for yourself that she hasn't
            come,”</span> cried Ivan.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But she may have come by that other
            entrance.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You know that entrance is locked, and you have the
            key.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Dmitri
            suddenly reappeared in the drawing-room. He had, of course, found
            the other entrance locked, and the key actually was in Fyodor
            Pavlovitch's pocket. The windows of all the rooms were also
            closed, so Grushenka could not have come in anywhere nor have run
            out anywhere.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Hold him!”</span> shrieked Fyodor Pavlovitch, as
            soon as he saw him again. <span class="tei tei-q">“He's been
            stealing money in my bedroom.”</span> And tearing himself from
            Ivan he rushed again at Dmitri. But Dmitri threw up both hands
            and suddenly clutched the old man by the two tufts of hair that
            remained on his temples, tugged at them, and flung him with a
            crash on the floor. He kicked him two or three times with his
            heel in the face. The old man moaned shrilly. Ivan, though not so
            strong as Dmitri, threw his arms round him, and with all his
            might pulled him away. Alyosha helped him with his slender
            strength, holding Dmitri in front.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Madman! You've killed him!”</span> cried Ivan.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Serve him right!”</span> shouted Dmitri
            breathlessly. <span class="tei tei-q">“If I haven't killed him,
            I'll come again and kill him. You can't protect him!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Dmitri! Go away at once!”</span> cried Alyosha
            commandingly.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page152">[pg
            152]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg152" name="Pg152"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alexey! You tell me. It's only you I can believe;
            was she here just now, or not? I saw her myself creeping this way
            by the fence from the lane. I shouted, she ran away.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I swear she's not been here, and no one expected
            her.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I saw her.... So she must ... I'll find out at
            once where she is.... Good-by, Alexey! Not a word to Æsop about
            the money now. But go to Katerina Ivanovna at once and be sure to
            say, <span class="tei tei-q">‘He sends his compliments to
            you!’</span> Compliments, his compliments! Just compliments and
            farewell! Describe the scene to her.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Meanwhile Ivan
            and Grigory had raised the old man and seated him in an
            arm-chair. His face was covered with blood, but he was conscious
            and listened greedily to Dmitri's cries. He was still fancying
            that Grushenka really was somewhere in the house. Dmitri looked
            at him with hatred as he went out.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't repent shedding your blood!”</span> he
            cried. <span class="tei tei-q">“Beware, old man, beware of your
            dream, for I have my dream, too. I curse you, and disown you
            altogether.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He ran out of
            the room.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She's here. She must be here. Smerdyakov!
            Smerdyakov!”</span> the old man wheezed, scarcely audibly,
            beckoning to him with his finger.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, she's not here, you old lunatic!”</span> Ivan
            shouted at him angrily. <span class="tei tei-q">“Here, he's
            fainting! Water! A towel! Make haste, Smerdyakov!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov ran
            for water. At last they got the old man undressed, and put him to
            bed. They wrapped a wet towel round his head. Exhausted by the
            brandy, by his violent emotion, and the blows he had received, he
            shut his eyes and fell asleep as soon as his head touched the
            pillow. Ivan and Alyosha went back to the drawing-room.
            Smerdyakov removed the fragments of the broken vase, while
            Grigory stood by the table looking gloomily at the floor.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Shouldn't you put a wet bandage on your head and go
            to bed, too?”</span> Alyosha said to him. <span class="tei tei-q">“We'll look after him. My brother gave you a terrible
            blow—on the head.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He's insulted me!”</span> Grigory articulated
            gloomily and distinctly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He's <span class="tei tei-q">‘insulted’</span> his
            father, not only you,”</span> observed Ivan with a forced
            smile.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page153">[pg
            153]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg153" name="Pg153"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I used to wash him in his tub. He's insulted
            me,”</span> repeated Grigory.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Damn it all, if I hadn't pulled him away perhaps
            he'd have murdered him. It wouldn't take much to do for Æsop,
            would it?”</span> whispered Ivan to Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“God forbid!”</span> cried Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why should He forbid?”</span> Ivan went on in the
            same whisper, with a malignant grimace. <span class="tei tei-q">“One reptile will devour the other. And serve them
            both right, too.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha
            shuddered.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Of course I won't let him be murdered as I didn't
            just now. Stay here, Alyosha, I'll go for a turn in the yard. My
            head's begun to ache.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha went
            to his father's bedroom and sat by his bedside behind the screen
            for about an hour. The old man suddenly opened his eyes and gazed
            for a long while at Alyosha, evidently remembering and
            meditating. All at once his face betrayed extraordinary
            excitement.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha,”</span> he whispered apprehensively,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“where's Ivan?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“In the yard. He's got a headache. He's on the
            watch.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Give me that looking-glass. It stands over there.
            Give it me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha gave
            him a little round folding looking-glass which stood on the chest
            of drawers. The old man looked at himself in it; his nose was
            considerably swollen, and on the left side of his forehead there
            was a rather large crimson bruise.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What does Ivan say? Alyosha, my dear, my only son,
            I'm afraid of Ivan. I'm more afraid of Ivan than the other.
            You're the only one I'm not afraid of....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't be afraid of Ivan either. He is angry, but
            he'll defend you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, and what of the other? He's run to
            Grushenka. My angel, tell me the truth, was she here just now or
            not?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No one has seen her. It was a mistake. She has not
            been here.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You know Mitya wants to marry her, to marry
            her.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She won't marry him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She won't. She won't. She won't. She won't on any
            account!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The old man
            fairly fluttered with joy, as though nothing more comforting
            could have been said to him. In his delight he seized
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page154">[pg 154]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg154" name="Pg154"></a> Alyosha's hand and
            pressed it warmly to his heart. Tears positively glittered in his
            eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That image of the Mother of God of which I was
            telling you just now,”</span> he said. <span class="tei tei-q">“Take it home and keep it for yourself. And I'll let
            you go back to the monastery.... I was joking this morning, don't
            be angry with me. My head aches, Alyosha.... Alyosha, comfort my
            heart. Be an angel and tell me the truth!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You're still asking whether she has been here or
            not?”</span> Alyosha said sorrowfully.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, no, no. I believe you. I'll tell you what it is:
            you go to Grushenka yourself, or see her somehow; make haste and
            ask her; see for yourself, which she means to choose, him or me.
            Eh? What? Can you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If I see her I'll ask her,”</span> Alyosha muttered,
            embarrassed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, she won't tell you,”</span> the old man
            interrupted, <span class="tei tei-q">“she's a rogue. She'll begin
            kissing you and say that it's you she wants. She's a deceitful,
            shameless hussy. You mustn't go to her, you mustn't!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, father, and it wouldn't be suitable, it wouldn't
            be right at all.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Where was he sending you just now? He shouted
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Go’</span> as he ran away.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To Katerina Ivanovna.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“For money? To ask her for money?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No. Not for money.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He's no money; not a farthing. I'll settle down for
            the night, and think things over, and you can go. Perhaps you'll
            meet her.... Only be sure to come to me to-morrow in the morning.
            Be sure to. I have a word to say to you to-morrow. Will you
            come?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“When you come, pretend you've come of your own
            accord to ask after me. Don't tell any one I told you to. Don't
            say a word to Ivan.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Very well.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Good-by, my angel. You stood up for me, just now. I
            shall never forget it. I've a word to say to you to-morrow—but I
            must think about it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And how do you feel now?”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page155">[pg 155]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg155" name="Pg155"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I shall get up to-morrow and go out, perfectly well,
            perfectly well!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Crossing the
            yard Alyosha found Ivan sitting on the bench at the gateway. He
            was sitting writing something in pencil in his note-book. Alyosha
            told Ivan that their father had waked up, was conscious, and had
            let him go back to sleep at the monastery.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, I should be very glad to meet you to-morrow
            morning,”</span> said Ivan cordially, standing up. His cordiality
            was a complete surprise to Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I shall be at the Hohlakovs' to-morrow,”</span>
            answered Alyosha, <span class="tei tei-q">“I may be at Katerina
            Ivanovna's, too, if I don't find her now.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But you're going to her now, anyway? For that
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘compliments and
            farewell,’</span> ”</span> said Ivan smiling. Alyosha was
            disconcerted.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I think I quite understand his exclamations just
            now, and part of what went before. Dmitri has asked you to go to
            her and say that he—well, in fact—takes his leave of
            her?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Brother, how will all this horror end between father
            and Dmitri?”</span> exclaimed Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“One can't tell for certain. Perhaps in nothing: it
            may all fizzle out. That woman is a beast. In any case we must
            keep the old man indoors and not let Dmitri in the
            house.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Brother, let me ask one thing more: has any man a
            right to look at other men and decide which is worthy to
            live?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why bring in the question of worth? The matter is
            most often decided in men's hearts on other grounds much more
            natural. And as for rights—who has not the right to
            wish?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Not for another man's death?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What even if for another man's death? Why lie to
            oneself since all men live so and perhaps cannot help living so.
            Are you referring to what I said just now—that one reptile will
            devour the other? In that case let me ask you, do you think me
            like Dmitri capable of shedding Æsop's blood, murdering him,
            eh?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What are you saying, Ivan? Such an idea never
            crossed my mind. I don't think Dmitri is capable of it,
            either.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thanks, if only for that,”</span> smiled Ivan.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Be sure, I should always defend him. But
            in my wishes I reserve myself full latitude in this case. Good-by
            till to-morrow. Don't condemn me, and don't look on me as a
            villain,”</span> he added with a smile.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page156">[pg 156]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg156" name="Pg156"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They shook
            hands warmly as they had never done before. Alyosha felt that his
            brother had taken the first step towards him, and that he had
            certainly done this with some definite motive.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em">
<a id="toc53" name="toc53"></a> <a id="pdf54" name="pdf54"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
