<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-3-2" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-3-2-8" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-top: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter VIII. Delirium</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">What followed
            was almost an orgy, a feast to which all were welcome. Grushenka
            was the first to call for wine.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I want to drink. I want to be quite drunk, as we
            were before. Do you remember, Mitya, do you remember how we made
            friends here last time!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya himself
            was almost delirious, feeling that his happiness was at hand. But
            Grushenka was continually sending him away from her.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Go and enjoy yourself. Tell them to dance, to make
            merry, <span class="tei tei-q">‘let the stove and cottage
            dance’</span>; as we had it last time,”</span> she kept
            exclaiming. She was tremendously excited. And Mitya hastened to
            obey her. The chorus were in the next room. The room in which
            they had been sitting till that moment was too small, and was
            divided in two by cotton curtains, behind which was a huge bed
            with a puffy feather mattress and a pyramid of cotton pillows. In
            the four rooms for visitors there were beds. Grushenka settled
            herself just at the door. Mitya set an easy chair for her. She
            had sat in the same place to watch the dancing and singing
            <span class="tei tei-q">“the time before,”</span> when they had
            made merry there. All the girls who had <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page486">[pg 486]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg486" name="Pg486"></a> come had been there then; the Jewish band
            with fiddles and zithers had come, too, and at last the long
            expected cart had arrived with the wines and provisions.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya bustled
            about. All sorts of people began coming into the room to look on,
            peasants and their women, who had been roused from sleep and
            attracted by the hopes of another marvelous entertainment such as
            they had enjoyed a month before. Mitya remembered their faces,
            greeting and embracing every one he knew. He uncorked bottles and
            poured out wine for every one who presented himself. Only the
            girls were very eager for the champagne. The men preferred rum,
            brandy, and, above all, hot punch. Mitya had chocolate made for
            all the girls, and ordered that three samovars should be kept
            boiling all night to provide tea and punch for everyone to help
            himself.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">An absurd
            chaotic confusion followed, but Mitya was in his natural element,
            and the more foolish it became, the more his spirits rose. If the
            peasants had asked him for money at that moment, he would have
            pulled out his notes and given them away right and left. This was
            probably why the landlord, Trifon Borissovitch, kept hovering
            about Mitya to protect him. He seemed to have given up all idea
            of going to bed that night; but he drank little, only one glass
            of punch, and kept a sharp look-out on Mitya's interests after
            his own fashion. He intervened in the nick of time, civilly and
            obsequiously persuading Mitya not to give away <span class="tei tei-q">“cigars and Rhine wine,”</span> and, above all, money
            to the peasants as he had done before. He was very indignant,
            too, at the peasant girls drinking liqueur, and eating
            sweets.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They're a lousy lot, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,”</span> he
            said. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'd give them a kick, every one of
            them, and they'd take it as an honor—that's all they're
            worth!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya
            remembered Andrey again, and ordered punch to be sent out to him.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I was rude to him just now,”</span> he
            repeated with a sinking, softened voice. Kalganov did not want to
            drink, and at first did not care for the girls' singing; but
            after he had drunk a couple of glasses of champagne he became
            extraordinarily lively, strolling about the room, laughing and
            praising the music and the songs, admiring every one and
            everything. Maximov, blissfully <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page487">[pg 487]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg487" name="Pg487"></a> drunk, never left his side. Grushenka, too,
            was beginning to get drunk. Pointing to Kalganov, she said to
            Mitya:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What a dear, charming boy he is!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And Mitya,
            delighted, ran to kiss Kalganov and Maximov. Oh, great were his
            hopes! She had said nothing yet, and seemed, indeed, purposely to
            refrain from speaking. But she looked at him from time to time
            with caressing and passionate eyes. At last she suddenly gripped
            his hand and drew him vigorously to her. She was sitting at the
            moment in the low chair by the door.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How was it you came just now, eh? Have you walked
            in!... I was frightened. So you wanted to give me up to him, did
            you? Did you really want to?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I didn't want to spoil your happiness!”</span> Mitya
            faltered blissfully. But she did not need his answer.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, go and enjoy yourself ...”</span> she sent him
            away once more. <span class="tei tei-q">“Don't cry, I'll call you
            back again.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He would run
            away, and she listened to the singing and looked at the dancing,
            though her eyes followed him wherever he went. But in another
            quarter of an hour she would call him once more and again he
            would run back to her.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Come, sit beside me, tell me, how did you hear about
            me, and my coming here yesterday? From whom did you first hear
            it?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And Mitya
            began telling her all about it, disconnectedly, incoherently,
            feverishly. He spoke strangely, often frowning, and stopping
            abruptly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What are you frowning at?”</span> she asked.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nothing.... I left a man ill there. I'd give ten
            years of my life for him to get well, to know he was all
            right!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, never mind him, if he's ill. So you meant to
            shoot yourself to-morrow! What a silly boy! What for? I like such
            reckless fellows as you,”</span> she lisped, with a rather
            halting tongue. <span class="tei tei-q">“So you would go any
            length for me, eh? Did you really mean to shoot yourself
            to-morrow, you stupid? No, wait a little. To-morrow I may have
            something to say to you.... I won't say it to-day, but to-morrow.
            You'd like it to be to-day? No, I don't want to to-day. Come, go
            along now, go and amuse yourself.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Once, however,
            she called him, as it were, puzzled and uneasy.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page488">[pg 488]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg488" name="Pg488"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why are you sad? I see you're sad.... Yes, I see
            it,”</span> she added, looking intently into his eyes.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Though you keep kissing the peasants and
            shouting, I see something. No, be merry. I'm merry; you be merry,
            too.... I love somebody here. Guess who it is. Ah, look, my boy
            has fallen asleep, poor dear, he's drunk.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She meant
            Kalganov. He was, in fact, drunk, and had dropped asleep for a
            moment, sitting on the sofa. But he was not merely drowsy from
            drink; he felt suddenly dejected, or, as he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“bored.”</span> He was intensely depressed by the
            girls' songs, which, as the drinking went on, gradually became
            coarse and more reckless. And the dances were as bad. Two girls
            dressed up as bears, and a lively girl, called Stepanida, with a
            stick in her hand, acted the part of keeper, and began to
            <span class="tei tei-q">“show them.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Look alive, Marya, or you'll get the
            stick!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The bears
            rolled on the ground at last in the most unseemly fashion, amid
            roars of laughter from the closely-packed crowd of men and
            women.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, let them! Let them!”</span> said Grushenka
            sententiously, with an ecstatic expression on her face.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“When they do get a day to enjoy
            themselves, why shouldn't folks be happy?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Kalganov
            looked as though he had been besmirched with dirt.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's swinish, all this peasant foolery,”</span> he
            murmured, moving away; <span class="tei tei-q">“it's the game
            they play when it's light all night in summer.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He
            particularly disliked one <span class="tei tei-q">“new”</span>
            song to a jaunty dance-tune. It described how a gentleman came
            and tried his luck with the girls, to see whether they would love
            him:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The master came to try the
                  girls:</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Would they love him, would
                  they not?</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the girls
            could not love the master:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">He would beat me
                  cruelly</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">And such love won't do for
                  me.</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then a gypsy
            comes along and he, too, tries:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The gypsy came to try the
                  girls:</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Would they love him, would
                  they not?</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But they
            couldn't love the gypsy either:</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page489">[pg 489]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg489" name="Pg489"></a>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">He would be a thief, I
                  fear,</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">And would cause me many a
                  tear.</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And many more
            men come to try their luck, among them a soldier:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The soldier came to try the
                  girls:</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Would they love him, would
                  they not?</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the
            soldier is rejected with contempt, in two indecent lines, sung
            with absolute frankness and producing a furore in the audience.
            The song ends with a merchant:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The merchant came to try the
                  girls:</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Would they love him, would
                  they not?</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And it appears
            that he wins their love because:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The merchant will make gold
                  for me</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">And his queen I'll gladly
                  be.</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Kalvanov was
            positively indignant.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's just a song of yesterday,”</span> he said
            aloud. <span class="tei tei-q">“Who writes such things for them?
            They might just as well have had a railwayman or a Jew come to
            try his luck with the girls; they'd have carried all before
            them.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And, almost as
            though it were a personal affront, he declared, on the spot, that
            he was bored, sat down on the sofa and immediately fell asleep.
            His pretty little face looked rather pale, as it fell back on the
            sofa cushion.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Look how pretty he is,”</span> said Grushenka,
            taking Mitya up to him. <span class="tei tei-q">“I was combing
            his hair just now; his hair's like flax, and so
            thick....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And, bending
            over him tenderly, she kissed his forehead. Kalganov instantly
            opened his eyes, looked at her, stood up, and with the most
            anxious air inquired where was Maximov?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“So that's who it is you want.”</span> Grushenka
            laughed. <span class="tei tei-q">“Stay with me a minute. Mitya,
            run and find his Maximov.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Maximov, it
            appeared, could not tear himself away from the girls, only
            running away from time to time to pour himself out a glass of
            liqueur. He had drunk two cups of chocolate. His face was red,
            and his nose was crimson; his eyes were moist and mawkishly
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page490">[pg 490]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg490" name="Pg490"></a> sweet. He ran up
            and announced that he was going to dance the <span class="tei tei-q">“sabotière.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They taught me all those well-bred, aristocratic
            dances when I was little....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Go, go with him, Mitya, and I'll watch from here how
            he dances,”</span> said Grushenka.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, no, I'm coming to look on, too,”</span>
            exclaimed Kalganov, brushing aside in the most naïve way
            Grushenka's offer to sit with him. They all went to look on.
            Maximov danced his dance. But it roused no great admiration in
            any one but Mitya. It consisted of nothing but skipping and
            hopping, kicking up the feet, and at every skip Maximov slapped
            the upturned sole of his foot. Kalganov did not like it at all,
            but Mitya kissed the dancer.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thanks. You're tired perhaps? What are you looking
            for here? Would you like some sweets? A cigar,
            perhaps?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“A cigarette.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't you want a drink?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'll just have a liqueur.... Have you any
            chocolates?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, there's a heap of them on the table there.
            Choose one, my dear soul!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I like one with vanilla ... for old people. He
            he!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, brother, we've none of that special
            sort.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I say,”</span> the old man bent down to whisper in
            Mitya's ear. <span class="tei tei-q">“That girl there, little
            Marya, he he! How would it be if you were to help me make friends
            with her?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“So that's what you're after! No, brother, that won't
            do!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'd do no harm to any one,”</span> Maximov muttered
            disconsolately.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, all right, all right. They only come here to
            dance and sing, you know, brother. But damn it all, wait a
            bit!... Eat and drink and be merry, meanwhile. Don't you want
            money?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Later on, perhaps,”</span> smiled Maximov.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“All right, all right....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya's head
            was burning. He went outside to the wooden balcony which ran
            round the whole building on the inner side, overlooking the
            courtyard. The fresh air revived him. He stood alone in a dark
            corner, and suddenly clutched his head in both hands. His
            scattered thoughts came together; his sensations blended into a
            whole and threw a sudden light into his mind. A fearful and
            terrible <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page491">[pg
            491]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg491" name="Pg491"></a>
            light! <span class="tei tei-q">“If I'm to shoot myself, why not
            now?”</span> passed through his mind. <span class="tei tei-q">“Why not go for the pistols, bring them here, and
            here, in this dark dirty corner, make an end?”</span> Almost a
            minute he stood, undecided. A few hours earlier, when he had been
            dashing here, he was pursued by disgrace, by the theft he had
            committed, and that blood, that blood!... But yet it was easier
            for him then. Then everything was over: he had lost her, given
            her up. She was gone, for him—oh, then his death sentence had
            been easier for him; at least it had seemed necessary,
            inevitable, for what had he to stay on earth for?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But now? Was
            it the same as then? Now one phantom, one terror at least was at
            an end: that first, rightful lover, that fateful figure had
            vanished, leaving no trace. The terrible phantom had turned into
            something so small, so comic; it had been carried into the
            bedroom and locked in. It would never return. She was ashamed,
            and from her eyes he could see now whom she loved. Now he had
            everything to make life happy ... but he could not go on living,
            he could not; oh, damnation! <span class="tei tei-q">“O God!
            restore to life the man I knocked down at the fence! Let this
            fearful cup pass from me! Lord, thou hast wrought miracles for
            such sinners as me! But what, what if the old man's alive? Oh,
            then the shame of the other disgrace I would wipe away. I would
            restore the stolen money. I'd give it back; I'd get it
            somehow.... No trace of that shame will remain except in my heart
            for ever! But no, no; oh, impossible cowardly dreams! Oh,
            damnation!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Yet there was
            a ray of light and hope in his darkness. He jumped up and ran
            back to the room—to her, to her, his queen for ever! Was not one
            moment of her love worth all the rest of life, even in the
            agonies of disgrace? This wild question clutched at his heart.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“To her, to her alone, to see her, to
            hear her, to think of nothing, to forget everything, if only for
            that night, for an hour, for a moment!”</span> Just as he turned
            from the balcony into the passage, he came upon the landlord,
            Trifon Borissovitch. He thought he looked gloomy and worried, and
            fancied he had come to find him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What is it, Trifon Borissovitch? are you looking for
            me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, sir.”</span> The landlord seemed disconcerted.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Why should I be looking for you? Where
            have you been?”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page492">[pg 492]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg492" name="Pg492"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why do you look so glum? You're not angry, are you?
            Wait a bit, you shall soon get to bed.... What's the
            time?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It'll be three o'clock. Past three, it must
            be.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We'll leave off soon. We'll leave off.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't mention it; it doesn't matter. Keep it up as
            long as you like....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What's the matter with him?”</span> Mitya wondered
            for an instant, and he ran back to the room where the girls were
            dancing. But she was not there. She was not in the blue room
            either; there was no one but Kalganov asleep on the sofa. Mitya
            peeped behind the curtain—she was there. She was sitting in the
            corner, on a trunk. Bent forward, with her head and arms on the
            bed close by, she was crying bitterly, doing her utmost to stifle
            her sobs that she might not be heard. Seeing Mitya, she beckoned
            him to her, and when he ran to her, she grasped his hand
            tightly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mitya, Mitya, I loved him, you know. How I have
            loved him these five years, all that time! Did I love him or only
            my own anger? No, him, him! It's a lie that it was my anger I
            loved and not him. Mitya, I was only seventeen then; he was so
            kind to me, so merry; he used to sing to me.... Or so it seemed
            to a silly girl like me.... And now, O Lord, it's not the same
            man. Even his face is not the same; he's different altogether. I
            shouldn't have known him. I drove here with Timofey, and all the
            way I was thinking how I should meet him, what I should say to
            him, how we should look at one another. My soul was faint, and
            all of a sudden it was just as though he had emptied a pail of
            dirty water over me. He talked to me like a schoolmaster, all so
            grave and learned; he met me so solemnly that I was struck dumb.
            I couldn't get a word in. At first I thought he was ashamed to
            talk before his great big Pole. I sat staring at him and
            wondering why I couldn't say a word to him now. It must have been
            his wife that ruined him; you know he threw me up to get married.
            She must have changed him like that. Mitya, how shameful it is!
            Oh, Mitya, I'm ashamed, I'm ashamed for all my life. Curse it,
            curse it, curse those five years!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And again she
            burst into tears, but clung tight to Mitya's hand and did not let
            it go.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mitya, darling, stay, don't go away. I want to say
            one word <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page493">[pg
            493]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg493" name="Pg493"></a>
            to you,”</span> she whispered, and suddenly raised her face to
            him. <span class="tei tei-q">“Listen, tell me who it is I love? I
            love one man here. Who is that man? That's what you must tell
            me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A smile
            lighted up her face that was swollen with weeping, and her eyes
            shone in the half darkness.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“A falcon flew in, and my heart sank. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Fool! that's the man you love!’</span> That was what
            my heart whispered to me at once. You came in and all grew
            bright. What's he afraid of? I wondered. For you were frightened;
            you couldn't speak. It's not them he's afraid of—could you be
            frightened of any one? It's me he's afraid of, I thought, only
            me. So Fenya told you, you little stupid, how I called to Alyosha
            out of the window that I'd loved Mityenka for one hour, and that
            I was going now to love ... another. Mitya, Mitya, how could I be
            such a fool as to think I could love any one after you? Do you
            forgive me, Mitya? Do you forgive me or not? Do you love me? Do
            you love me?”</span> She jumped up and held him with both hands
            on his shoulders. Mitya, dumb with rapture, gazed into her eyes,
            at her face, at her smile, and suddenly clasped her tightly in
            his arms and kissed her passionately.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You will forgive me for having tormented you? It was
            through spite I tormented you all. It was for spite I drove the
            old man out of his mind.... Do you remember how you drank at my
            house one day and broke the wine-glass? I remembered that and I
            broke a glass to-day and drank <span class="tei tei-q">‘to my
            vile heart.’</span> Mitya, my falcon, why don't you kiss me? He
            kissed me once, and now he draws back and looks and listens. Why
            listen to me? Kiss me, kiss me hard, that's right. If you love,
            well, then, love! I'll be your slave now, your slave for the rest
            of my life. It's sweet to be a slave. Kiss me! Beat me, ill-treat
            me, do what you will with me.... And I do deserve to suffer.
            Stay, wait, afterwards, I won't have that....”</span> she
            suddenly thrust him away. <span class="tei tei-q">“Go along,
            Mitya, I'll come and have some wine, I want to be drunk, I'm
            going to get drunk and dance; I must, I must!”</span> She tore
            herself away from him and disappeared behind the curtain. Mitya
            followed like a drunken man.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, come what may—whatever may happen now, for one
            minute I'd give the whole world,”</span> he thought. Grushenka
            did, in fact, toss off a whole glass of champagne at one gulp,
            and became at once very tipsy. She sat down in the same chair as
            before, with a blissful <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page494">[pg
            494]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg494" name="Pg494"></a>
            smile on her face. Her cheeks were glowing, her lips were
            burning, her flashing eyes were moist; there was passionate
            appeal in her eyes. Even Kalganov felt a stir at the heart and
            went up to her.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Did you feel how I kissed you when you were asleep
            just now?”</span> she said thickly. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'm
            drunk now, that's what it is.... And aren't you drunk? And why
            isn't Mitya drinking? Why don't you drink, Mitya? I'm drunk, and
            you don't drink....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am drunk! I'm drunk as it is ... drunk with you
            ... and now I'll be drunk with wine, too.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He drank off
            another glass, and—he thought it strange himself—that glass made
            him completely drunk. He was suddenly drunk, although till that
            moment he had been quite sober, he remembered that. From that
            moment everything whirled about him, as though he were delirious.
            He walked, laughed, talked to everybody, without knowing what he
            was doing. Only one persistent burning sensation made itself felt
            continually, <span class="tei tei-q">“like a red-hot coal in his
            heart,”</span> he said afterwards. He went up to her, sat beside
            her, gazed at her, listened to her.... She became very talkative,
            kept calling every one to her, and beckoned to different girls
            out of the chorus. When the girl came up, she either kissed her,
            or made the sign of the cross over her. In another minute she
            might have cried. She was greatly amused by the <span class="tei tei-q">“little old man,”</span> as she called Maximov. He
            ran up every minute to kiss her hands, <span class="tei tei-q">“each little finger,”</span> and finally he danced
            another dance to an old song, which he sang himself. He danced
            with special vigor to the refrain:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The little pig says—umph!
                  umph! umph!</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The little calf says—moo, moo,
                  moo,</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The little duck says—quack,
                  quack, quack,</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The little goose says—ga, ga,
                  ga.</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">The hen goes strutting through
                  the porch;</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo, she'll
                  say,</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo, she'll
                  say!</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Give him something, Mitya,”</span> said Grushenka.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Give him a present, he's poor, you know.
            Ah, the poor, the insulted!... Do you know, Mitya, I shall go
            into a nunnery. No, I really shall one day, Alyosha said
            something to me to-day that I shall remember all my life....
            Yes.... But to-day let us dance. To-morrow <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page495">[pg 495]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg495" name="Pg495"></a> to the nunnery, but to-day
            we'll dance. I want to play to-day, good people, and what of it?
            God will forgive us. If I were God, I'd forgive every one:
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘My dear sinners, from this day forth I
            forgive you.’</span> I'm going to beg forgiveness: <span class="tei tei-q">‘Forgive me, good people, a silly wench.’</span> I'm
            a beast, that's what I am. But I want to pray. I gave a little
            onion. Wicked as I've been, I want to pray. Mitya, let them
            dance, don't stop them. Every one in the world is good. Every
            one—even the worst of them. The world's a nice place. Though
            we're bad the world's all right. We're good and bad, good and
            bad.... Come, tell me, I've something to ask you: come here every
            one, and I'll ask you: Why am I so good? You know I am good. I'm
            very good.... Come, why am I so good?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So Grushenka
            babbled on, getting more and more drunk. At last she announced
            that she was going to dance, too. She got up from her chair,
            staggering. <span class="tei tei-q">“Mitya, don't give me any
            more wine—if I ask you, don't give it to me. Wine doesn't give
            peace. Everything's going round, the stove, and everything. I
            want to dance. Let every one see how I dance ... let them see how
            beautifully I dance....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She really
            meant it. She pulled a white cambric handkerchief out of her
            pocket, and took it by one corner in her right hand, to wave it
            in the dance. Mitya ran to and fro, the girls were quiet, and got
            ready to break into a dancing song at the first signal. Maximov,
            hearing that Grushenka wanted to dance, squealed with delight,
            and ran skipping about in front of her, humming:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">With legs so slim and sides so
                  trim</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">And its little tail curled
                  tight.</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Grushenka
            waved her handkerchief at him and drove him away.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Sh-h! Mitya, why don't they come? Let every one come
            ... to look on. Call them in, too, that were locked in.... Why
            did you lock them in? Tell them I'm going to dance. Let them look
            on, too....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya walked
            with a drunken swagger to the locked door, and began knocking to
            the Poles with his fist.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Hi, you ... Podvysotskys! Come, she's going to
            dance. She calls you.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page496">[pg 496]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg496" name="Pg496"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Lajdak!</span></span>”</span> one of the
            Poles shouted in reply.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You're a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">lajdak</span></span> yourself! You're a
            little scoundrel, that's what you are.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Leave off laughing at Poland,”</span> said Kalganov
            sententiously. He too was drunk.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Be quiet, boy! If I call him a scoundrel, it doesn't
            mean that I called all Poland so. One <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">lajdak</span></span> doesn't make a Poland.
            Be quiet, my pretty boy, eat a sweetmeat.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ach, what fellows! As though they were not men. Why
            won't they make friends?”</span> said Grushenka, and went forward
            to dance. The chorus broke into <span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, my
            porch, my new porch!”</span> Grushenka flung back her head, half
            opened her lips, smiled, waved her handkerchief, and suddenly,
            with a violent lurch, stood still in the middle of the room,
            looking bewildered.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'm weak....”</span> she said in an exhausted voice.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Forgive me.... I'm weak, I can't.... I'm
            sorry.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She bowed to
            the chorus, and then began bowing in all directions.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'm sorry.... Forgive me....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The lady's been drinking. The pretty lady has been
            drinking,”</span> voices were heard saying.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The lady's drunk too much,”</span> Maximov explained
            to the girls, giggling.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mitya, lead me away ... take me,”</span> said
            Grushenka helplessly. Mitya pounced on her, snatched her up in
            his arms, and carried the precious burden through the
            curtains.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, now I'll go,”</span> thought Kalganov, and
            walking out of the blue room, he closed the two halves of the
            door after him. But the orgy in the larger room went on and grew
            louder and louder. Mitya laid Grushenka on the bed and kissed her
            on the lips.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't touch me....”</span> she faltered, in an
            imploring voice. <span class="tei tei-q">“Don't touch me, till
            I'm yours.... I've told you I'm yours, but don't touch me ...
            spare me.... With them here, with them close, you mustn't. He's
            here. It's nasty here....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'll obey you! I won't think of it ... I worship
            you!”</span> muttered Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, it's
            nasty here, it's abominable.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And still
            holding her in his arms, he sank on his knees by the bedside.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I know, though you're a brute, you're
            generous,”</span> Grushenka <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page497">[pg 497]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg497" name="Pg497"></a> articulated with difficulty. <span class="tei tei-q">“It must be honorable ... it shall be honorable for
            the future ... and let us be honest, let us be good, not brutes,
            but good ... take me away, take me far away, do you hear? I don't
            want it to be here, but far, far away....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, yes, yes, it must be!”</span> said Mitya,
            pressing her in his arms. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll take you
            and we'll fly away.... Oh, I'd give my whole life for one year
            only to know about that blood!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What blood?”</span> asked Grushenka, bewildered.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nothing,”</span> muttered Mitya, through his teeth.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Grusha, you wanted to be honest, but I'm
            a thief. But I've stolen money from Katya.... Disgrace, a
            disgrace!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“From Katya, from that young lady? No, you didn't
            steal it. Give it her back, take it from me.... Why make a fuss?
            Now everything of mine is yours. What does money matter? We shall
            waste it anyway.... Folks like us are bound to waste money. But
            we'd better go and work the land. I want to dig the earth with my
            own hands. We must work, do you hear? Alyosha said so. I won't be
            your mistress, I'll be faithful to you, I'll be your slave, I'll
            work for you. We'll go to the young lady and bow down to her
            together, so that she may forgive us, and then we'll go away. And
            if she won't forgive us, we'll go, anyway. Take her her money and
            love me.... Don't love her.... Don't love her any more. If you
            love her, I shall strangle her.... I'll put out both her eyes
            with a needle....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I love you. I love only you. I'll love you in
            Siberia....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why Siberia? Never mind, Siberia, if you like. I
            don't care ... we'll work ... there's snow in Siberia.... I love
            driving in the snow ... and must have bells.... Do you hear,
            there's a bell ringing? Where is that bell ringing? There are
            people coming.... Now it's stopped.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She closed her
            eyes, exhausted, and suddenly fell asleep for an instant. There
            had certainly been the sound of a bell in the distance, but the
            ringing had ceased. Mitya let his head sink on her breast. He did
            not notice that the bell had ceased ringing, nor did he notice
            that the songs had ceased, and that instead of singing and
            drunken clamor there was absolute stillness in the house.
            Grushenka opened her eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What's the matter? Was I asleep? Yes ... a bell ...
            I've <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page498">[pg
            498]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg498" name="Pg498"></a>
            been asleep and dreamt I was driving over the snow with bells,
            and I dozed. I was with some one I loved, with you. And far, far
            away. I was holding you and kissing you, nestling close to you. I
            was cold, and the snow glistened.... You know how the snow
            glistens at night when the moon shines. It was as though I was
            not on earth. I woke up, and my dear one is close to me. How
            sweet that is!...”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Close to you,”</span> murmured Mitya, kissing her
            dress, her bosom, her hands. And suddenly he had a strange fancy:
            it seemed to him that she was looking straight before her, not at
            him, not into his face, but over his head, with an intent, almost
            uncanny fixity. An expression of wonder, almost of alarm, came
            suddenly into her face.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mitya, who is that looking at us?”</span> she
            whispered.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya turned,
            and saw that some one had, in fact, parted the curtains and
            seemed to be watching them. And not one person alone, it
            seemed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He jumped up
            and walked quickly to the intruder.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here, come to us, come here,”</span> said a voice,
            speaking not loudly, but firmly and peremptorily.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya passed
            to the other side of the curtain and stood stock still. The room
            was filled with people, but not those who had been there before.
            An instantaneous shiver ran down his back, and he shuddered. He
            recognized all those people instantly. That tall, stout old man
            in the overcoat and forage-cap with a cockade—was the police
            captain, Mihail Makarovitch. And that <span class="tei tei-q">“consumptive-looking”</span> trim dandy, <span class="tei tei-q">“who always has such polished boots”</span>—that was
            the deputy prosecutor. <span class="tei tei-q">“He has a
            chronometer worth four hundred roubles; he showed it to
            me.”</span> And that small young man in spectacles.... Mitya
            forgot his surname though he knew him, had seen him: he was the
            <span class="tei tei-q">“investigating lawyer,”</span> from the
            <span class="tei tei-q">“school of jurisprudence,”</span> who had
            only lately come to the town. And this man—the inspector of
            police, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, a man he knew well. And those
            fellows with the brass plates on, why are they here? And those
            other two ... peasants.... And there at the door Kalganov with
            Trifon Borissovitch....</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen! What's this for, gentlemen?”</span> began
            Mitya, but suddenly, as though beside himself, not knowing what
            he was doing, he cried aloud, at the top of his
            voice:</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page499">[pg
            499]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg499" name="Pg499"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I un—der—stand!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The young man
            in spectacles moved forward suddenly, and stepping up to Mitya,
            began with dignity, though hurriedly:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We have to make ... in brief, I beg you to come this
            way, this way to the sofa.... It is absolutely imperative that
            you should give an explanation.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The old man!”</span> cried Mitya frantically.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“The old man and his blood!... I
            understand.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And he sank,
            almost fell, on a chair close by, as though he had been mown down
            by a scythe.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You understand? He understands it! Monster and
            parricide! Your father's blood cries out against you!”</span> the
            old captain of police roared suddenly, stepping up to Mitya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He was beside
            himself, crimson in the face and quivering all over.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“This is impossible!”</span> cried the small young
            man. <span class="tei tei-q">“Mihail Makarovitch, Mihail
            Makarovitch, this won't do!... I beg you'll allow me to speak. I
            should never have expected such behavior from you....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“This is delirium, gentlemen, raving
            delirium,”</span> cried the captain of police; <span class="tei tei-q">“look at him: drunk, at this time of night, in the
            company of a disreputable woman, with the blood of his father on
            his hands.... It's delirium!...”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I beg you most earnestly, dear Mihail Makarovitch,
            to restrain your feelings,”</span> the prosecutor said in a rapid
            whisper to the old police captain, <span class="tei tei-q">“or I
            shall be forced to resort to—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the little
            lawyer did not allow him to finish. He turned to Mitya, and
            delivered himself in a loud, firm, dignified voice:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ex-Lieutenant Karamazov, it is my duty to inform you
            that you are charged with the murder of your father, Fyodor
            Pavlovitch Karamazov, perpetrated this night....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He said
            something more, and the prosecutor, too, put in something, but
            though Mitya heard them he did not understand them. He stared at
            them all with wild eyes.</p>
</section></section></section></body></html>
