<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="book-4-2" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-4-2-10" epub:type="chapter">
					<h2 epub:type="title">
						<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter X.</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 120%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 120%">It Was He Who Said That</span>
							<span style="font-size: 120%">”</span>
						</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Alyosha coming in told Ivan that a little over an hour ago Marya Kondratyevna had run to his rooms and informed him Smerdyakov had taken his own life. <span class="tei tei-q">“I went in to clear away the samovar and he was hanging on a nail in the wall.”</span> On Alyosha's inquiring whether she had informed the police, she answered that she had told no one, <span class="tei tei-q">“but I flew straight to you, I've run all the way.”</span> She seemed perfectly crazy, Alyosha reported, and was shaking like a leaf. When Alyosha ran with her to the cottage, he found Smerdyakov still hanging. On the table lay a note: <span class="tei tei-q">“I destroy my life of my own will and desire, so as to throw no blame on any one.”</span> Alyosha left the note on the table and went straight to the police captain and told him all about it. <span class="tei tei-q">“And from him I've come straight to you,”</span> said Alyosha, in conclusion, looking intently into Ivan's face. He had not taken his eyes off him while he told his story, as though struck by something in his expression.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Brother,”</span> he cried suddenly, <span class="tei tei-q">“you must be terribly ill. You look and don't seem to understand what I tell you.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It's a good thing you came,”</span> said Ivan, as though brooding, and not hearing Alyosha's exclamation. <span class="tei tei-q">“I knew he had hanged himself.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“From whom?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I don't know. But I knew. Did I know? Yes, he told me. He told me so just now.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Ivan stood in the middle of the room, and still spoke in the same brooding tone, looking at the ground.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Who is <em>he</em>?”</span> asked Alyosha, involuntarily looking round.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“He's slipped away.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Ivan raised his head and smiled softly.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“He was afraid of you, of a dove like you. You are a <span class="tei tei-q">‘pure cherub.’</span> Dmitri calls you a cherub. Cherub!... the thunderous rapture of the seraphim. What are seraphim? Perhaps a whole constellation. But perhaps that constellation is only a chemical molecule. There's a constellation of the Lion and the Sun. Don't you know it?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Brother, sit down,”</span> said Alyosha in alarm. <span class="tei tei-q">“For goodness' sake, sit down on the sofa! You are delirious; put your head on the pillow, that's right. Would you like a wet towel on your head? Perhaps it will do you good.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Give me the towel: it's here on the chair. I just threw it down there.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It's not here. Don't worry yourself. I know where it is—here,”</span> said Alyosha, finding a clean towel, folded up and unused, by Ivan's dressing-table in the other corner of the room. Ivan looked strangely at the towel: recollection seemed to come back to him for an instant.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Stay”</span>—he got up from the sofa—<span class="tei tei-q">“an hour ago I took that new towel from there and wetted it. I wrapped it round my head and threw it down here ... How is it it's dry? There was no other.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“You put that towel on your head?”</span> asked Alyosha.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, and walked up and down the room an hour ago ... Why have the candles burnt down so? What's the time?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Nearly twelve.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“No, no, no!”</span> Ivan cried suddenly. <span class="tei tei-q">“It was not a dream. He was here; he was sitting here, on that sofa. When you knocked at the window, I threw a glass at him ... this one. Wait a minute. I was asleep last time, but this dream was not a dream. It has happened before. I have dreams now, Alyosha ... yet they are not dreams, but reality. I walk about, talk and see ... though I am asleep. But he was sitting here, on that sofa there.... He is frightfully stupid, Alyosha, frightfully stupid.”</span> Ivan laughed suddenly and began pacing about the room.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Who is stupid? Of whom are you talking, brother?”</span> Alyosha asked anxiously again.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“The devil! He's taken to visiting me. He's been here twice, almost three times. He taunted me with being angry at his being a simple devil and not Satan, with scorched wings, in thunder and lightning. But he is not Satan: that's a lie. He is an impostor. He is simply a devil—a paltry, trivial devil. He goes to the baths. If you undressed him, you'd be sure to find he had a tail, long and smooth like a Danish dog's, a yard long, dun color.... Alyosha, you are cold. You've been in the snow. Would you like some tea? What? Is it cold? Shall I tell her to bring some? <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">C'est Ã ne pas mettre un chien dehors.</span></span>...”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Alyosha ran to the washing-stand, wetted the towel, persuaded Ivan to sit down again, and put the wet towel round his head. He sat down beside him.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What were you telling me just now about Lise?”</span> Ivan began again. (He was becoming very talkative.) <span class="tei tei-q">“I like Lise. I said something nasty about her. It was a lie. I like her ... I am afraid for Katya to-morrow. I am more afraid of her than of anything. On account of the future. She will cast me off to-morrow and trample me under foot. She thinks that I am ruining Mitya from jealousy on her account! Yes, she thinks that! But it's not so. To-morrow the cross, but not the gallows. No, I shan't hang myself. Do you know, I can never commit suicide, Alyosha. Is it because I am base? I am not a coward. Is it from love of life? How did I know that Smerdyakov had hanged himself? Yes, it was <em>he</em> told me so.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And you are quite convinced that there has been some one here?”</span> asked Alyosha.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, on that sofa in the corner. You would have driven him away. You did drive him away: he disappeared when you arrived. I love your face, Alyosha. Did you know that I loved your face? And <em>he</em> is myself, Alyosha. All that's base in me, all that's mean and contemptible. Yes, I am a romantic. He guessed it ... though it's a libel. He is frightfully stupid; but it's to his advantage. He has cunning, animal cunning—he knew how to infuriate me. He kept taunting me with believing in him, and that was how he made me listen to him. He fooled me like a boy. He told me a great deal that was true about myself, though. I should never have owned it to myself. Do you know, Alyosha,”</span> Ivan added in an intensely earnest and confidential tone, <span class="tei tei-q">“I should be awfully glad to think that it was <em>he</em> and not I.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He has worn you out,”</span> said Alyosha, looking compassionately at his brother.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“He's been teasing me. And you know he does it so cleverly, so cleverly. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Conscience! What is conscience? I make it up for myself. Why am I tormented by it? From habit. From the universal habit of mankind for the seven thousand years. So let us give it up, and we shall be gods.’</span> It was he said that, it was he said that!”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And not you, not you?”</span> Alyosha could not help crying, looking frankly at his brother. <span class="tei tei-q">“Never mind him, anyway; have done with him and forget him. And let him take with him all that you curse now, and never come back!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, but he is spiteful. He laughed at me. He was impudent, Alyosha,”</span> Ivan said, with a shudder of offense. <span class="tei tei-q">“But he was unfair to me, unfair to me about lots of things. He told lies about me to my face. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Oh, you are going to perform an act of heroic virtue: to confess you murdered your father, that the valet murdered him at your instigation.’</span> ”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Brother,”</span> Alyosha interposed, <span class="tei tei-q">“restrain yourself. It was not you murdered him. It's not true!”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That's what he says, he, and he knows it. <span class="tei tei-q">‘You are going to perform an act of heroic virtue, and you don't believe in virtue; that's what tortures you and makes you angry, that's why you are so vindictive.’</span> He said that to me about me and he knows what he says.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It's you say that, not he,”</span> exclaimed Alyosha mournfully, <span class="tei tei-q">“and you say it because you are ill and delirious, tormenting yourself.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“No, he knows what he says. <span class="tei tei-q">‘You are going from pride,’</span> he says. <span class="tei tei-q">‘You'll stand up and say it was I killed him, and why do you writhe with horror? You are lying! I despise your opinion, I despise your horror!’</span> He said that about me. <span class="tei tei-q">‘And do you know you are longing for their praise—<span class="tei tei-q">“he is a criminal, a murderer, but what a generous soul; he wanted to save his brother and he confessed.”</span> ’</span> That's a lie, Alyosha!”</span> Ivan cried suddenly, with flashing eyes. <span class="tei tei-q">“I don't want the low rabble to praise me, I swear I don't! That's a lie! That's why I threw the glass at him and it broke against his ugly face.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Brother, calm yourself, stop!”</span> Alyosha entreated him.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, he knows how to torment one. He's cruel,”</span> Ivan went on, unheeding. <span class="tei tei-q">“I had an inkling from the first what he came for. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Granting that you go through pride, still you had a hope that Smerdyakov might be convicted and sent to Siberia, and Mitya would be acquitted, while you would only be punished with moral condemnation’</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">‘Do you hear?’</span> he laughed then)—<span class="tei tei-q">‘and some people will praise you. But now Smerdyakov's dead, he has hanged himself, and who'll believe you alone? But yet you are going, you are going, you'll go all the same, you've decided to go. What are you going for now?’</span> That's awful, Alyosha. I can't endure such questions. Who dare ask me such questions?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Brother,”</span> interposed Alyosha—his heart sank with terror, but he still seemed to hope to bring Ivan to reason—<span class="tei tei-q">“how could he have told you of Smerdyakov's death before I came, when no one knew of it and there was no time for any one to know of it?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He told me,”</span> said Ivan firmly, refusing to admit a doubt. <span class="tei tei-q">“It was all he did talk about, if you come to that. <span class="tei tei-q">‘And it would be all right if you believed in virtue,’</span> he said. <span class="tei tei-q">‘No matter if they disbelieve you, you are going for the sake of principle. But you are a little pig like Fyodor Pavlovitch, and what do you want with virtue? Why do you want to go meddling if your sacrifice is of no use to any one? Because you don't know yourself why you go! Oh, you'd give a great deal to know yourself why you go! And can you have made up your mind? You've not made up your mind. You'll sit all night deliberating whether to go or not. But you will go; you know you'll go. You know that whichever way you decide, the decision does not depend on you. You'll go because you won't dare not to go. Why won't you dare? You must guess that for yourself. That's a riddle for you!’</span> He got up and went away. You came and he went. He called me a coward, Alyosha! <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">Le mot de l'énigme</span></span> is that I am a coward. <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is not for such eagles to soar above the earth.’</span> It was he added that—he! And Smerdyakov said the same. He must be killed! Katya despises me. I've seen that for a month past. Even Lise will begin to despise me! <span class="tei tei-q">‘You are going in order to be praised.’</span> That's a brutal lie! And you despise me too, Alyosha. Now I am going to hate you again! And I hate the monster, too! I hate the monster! I don't want to save the monster. Let him rot in Siberia! He's begun singing a hymn! Oh, to-morrow I'll go, stand before them, and spit in their faces!”</span></p>
					<p>He jumped up in a frenzy, flung off the towel, and fell to pacing up and down the room again. Alyosha recalled what he had just said. <span class="tei tei-q">“I seem to be sleeping awake.... I walk, I speak, I see, but I am asleep.”</span> It seemed to be just like that now. Alyosha did not leave him. The thought passed through his mind to run for a doctor, but he was afraid to leave his brother alone: there was no one to whom he could leave him. By degrees Ivan lost consciousness completely at last. He still went on talking, talking incessantly, but quite incoherently, and even articulated his words with difficulty. Suddenly he staggered violently; but Alyosha was in time to support him. Ivan let him lead him to his bed. Alyosha undressed him somehow and put him to bed. He sat watching over him for another two hours. The sick man slept soundly, without stirring, breathing softly and evenly. Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on the sofa, without undressing.</p>
					<p>As he fell asleep he prayed for Mitya and Ivan. He began to understand Ivan's illness. <span class="tei tei-q">“The anguish of a proud determination. An earnest conscience!”</span> God, in Whom he disbelieved, and His truth were gaining mastery over his heart, which still refused to submit. <span class="tei tei-q">“Yes,”</span> the thought floated through Alyosha's head as it lay on the pillow, <span class="tei tei-q">“yes, if Smerdyakov is dead, no one will believe Ivan's evidence; but he will go and give it.”</span> Alyosha smiled softly. <span class="tei tei-q">“God will conquer!”</span> he thought. <span class="tei tei-q">“He will either rise up in the light of truth, or ... he'll perish in hate, revenging on himself and on every one his having served the cause he does not believe in,”</span> Alyosha added bitterly, and again he prayed for Ivan.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
