<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-2-3" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-2-3-2" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter II. The Duel</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">(c) Recollections
            of Father Zossima's Youth before he became a Monk. The
            Duel</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I spent a long
            time, almost eight years, in the military cadet school at
            Petersburg, and in the novelty of my surroundings there, many of
            my childish impressions grew dimmer, though I <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page326">[pg 326]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg326" name="Pg326"></a> forgot nothing. I picked up
            so many new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a
            cruel, absurd, almost savage creature. A surface polish of
            courtesy and society manners I did acquire together with the
            French language.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But we all,
            myself included, looked upon the soldiers in our service as
            cattle. I was perhaps worse than the rest in that respect, for I
            was so much more impressionable than my companions. By the time
            we left the school as officers, we were ready to lay down our
            lives for the honor of the regiment, but no one of us had any
            knowledge of the real meaning of honor, and if any one had known
            it, he would have been the first to ridicule it. Drunkenness,
            debauchery and devilry were what we almost prided ourselves on. I
            don't say that we were bad by nature, all these young men were
            good fellows, but they behaved badly, and I worst of all. What
            made it worse for me was that I had come into my own money, and
            so I flung myself into a life of pleasure, and plunged headlong
            into all the recklessness of youth.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I was fond of
            reading, yet strange to say, the Bible was the one book I never
            opened at that time, though I always carried it about with me,
            and I was never separated from it; in very truth I was keeping
            that book <span class="tei tei-q">“for the day and the hour, for
            the month and the year,”</span> though I knew it not.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">After four
            years of this life, I chanced to be in the town of K. where our
            regiment was stationed at the time. We found the people of the
            town hospitable, rich and fond of entertainments. I met with a
            cordial reception everywhere, as I was of a lively temperament
            and was known to be well off, which always goes a long way in the
            world. And then a circumstance happened which was the beginning
            of it all.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I formed an
            attachment to a beautiful and intelligent young girl of noble and
            lofty character, the daughter of people much respected. They were
            well-to-do people of influence and position. They always gave me
            a cordial and friendly reception. I fancied that the young lady
            looked on me with favor and my heart was aflame at such an idea.
            Later on I saw and fully realized that I perhaps was not so
            passionately in love with her at all, but only recognized the
            elevation of her mind and character, which I could not indeed
            have helped doing. I was prevented, however, from making her an
            offer at the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page327">[pg
            327]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg327" name="Pg327"></a>
            time by my selfishness, I was loath to part with the allurements
            of my free and licentious bachelor life in the heyday of my
            youth, and with my pockets full of money. I did drop some hint as
            to my feelings however, though I put off taking any decisive step
            for a time. Then, all of a sudden, we were ordered off for two
            months to another district.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On my return
            two months later, I found the young lady already married to a
            rich neighboring landowner, a very amiable man, still young
            though older than I was, connected with the best Petersburg
            society, which I was not, and of excellent education, which I
            also was not. I was so overwhelmed at this unexpected
            circumstance that my mind was positively clouded. The worst of it
            all was that, as I learned then, the young landowner had been a
            long while betrothed to her, and I had met him indeed many times
            in her house, but blinded by my conceit I had noticed nothing.
            And this particularly mortified me; almost everybody had known
            all about it, while I knew nothing. I was filled with sudden
            irrepressible fury. With flushed face I began recalling how often
            I had been on the point of declaring my love to her, and as she
            had not attempted to stop me or to warn me, she must, I
            concluded, have been laughing at me all the time. Later on, of
            course, I reflected and remembered that she had been very far
            from laughing at me; on the contrary, she used to turn off any
            love-making on my part with a jest and begin talking of other
            subjects; but at that moment I was incapable of reflecting and
            was all eagerness for revenge. I am surprised to remember that my
            wrath and revengeful feelings were extremely repugnant to my own
            nature, for being of an easy temper, I found it difficult to be
            angry with any one for long, and so I had to work myself up
            artificially and became at last revolting and absurd.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I waited for
            an opportunity and succeeded in insulting my <span class="tei tei-q">“rival”</span> in the presence of a large company. I
            insulted him on a perfectly extraneous pretext, jeering at his
            opinion upon an important public event—it was in the year
            1826<a href="#note_5" id="noteref_5" name="noteref_5"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">5</span></span></a>—and
            my jeer was, so people said, clever and effective. Then I forced
            him to ask for an explanation, and behaved so rudely that he
            accepted my challenge in spite of the vast inequality between us,
            as I was younger, a person of no consequence, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page328">[pg 328]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg328" name="Pg328"></a> and of inferior rank. I
            learned afterwards for a fact that it was from a jealous feeling
            on his side also that my challenge was accepted; he had been
            rather jealous of me on his wife's account before their marriage;
            he fancied now that if he submitted to be insulted by me and
            refused to accept my challenge, and if she heard of it, she might
            begin to despise him and waver in her love for him. I soon found
            a second in a comrade, an ensign of our regiment. In those days
            though duels were severely punished, yet dueling was a kind of
            fashion among the officers—so strong and deeply rooted will a
            brutal prejudice sometimes be.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was the end
            of June, and our meeting was to take place at seven o'clock the
            next day on the outskirts of the town—and then something happened
            that in very truth was the turning-point of my life. In the
            evening, returning home in a savage and brutal humor, I flew into
            a rage with my orderly Afanasy, and gave him two blows in the
            face with all my might, so that it was covered with blood. He had
            not long been in my service and I had struck him before, but
            never with such ferocious cruelty. And, believe me, though it's
            forty years ago, I recall it now with shame and pain. I went to
            bed and slept for about three hours; when I waked up the day was
            breaking. I got up—I did not want to sleep any more—I went to the
            window—opened it, it looked out upon the garden; I saw the sun
            rising; it was warm and beautiful, the birds were singing.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What's the meaning of it?”</span> I thought.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I feel in my heart as it were something
            vile and shameful. Is it because I am going to shed blood?
            No,”</span> I thought, <span class="tei tei-q">“I feel it's not
            that. Can it be that I am afraid of death, afraid of being
            killed? No, that's not it, that's not it at all.”</span>... And
            all at once I knew what it was: it was because I had beaten
            Afanasy the evening before! It all rose before my mind, it all
            was as it were repeated over again; he stood before me and I was
            beating him straight on the face and he was holding his arms
            stiffly down, his head erect, his eyes fixed upon me as though on
            parade. He staggered at every blow and did not even dare to raise
            his hands to protect himself. That is what a man has been brought
            to, and that was a man beating a fellow creature! What a crime!
            It was as though a sharp dagger had pierced me right through. I
            stood as if I were struck dumb, while the sun <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page329">[pg 329]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg329" name="Pg329"></a> was shining, the leaves were
            rejoicing and the birds were trilling the praise of God.... I hid
            my face in my hands, fell on my bed and broke into a storm of
            tears. And then I remembered my brother Markel and what he said
            on his death-bed to his servants: <span class="tei tei-q">“My
            dear ones, why do you wait on me, why do you love me, am I worth
            your waiting on me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, am I worth it?”</span> flashed through my mind.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“After all what am I worth, that another
            man, a fellow creature, made in the likeness and image of God,
            should serve me?”</span> For the first time in my life this
            question forced itself upon me. He had said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mother, my little heart, in truth we are each
            responsible to all for all, it's only that men don't know this.
            If they knew it, the world would be a paradise at
            once.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“God, can that too be false?”</span> I thought as I
            wept. <span class="tei tei-q">“In truth, perhaps, I am more than
            all others responsible for all, a greater sinner than all men in
            the world.”</span> And all at once the whole truth in its full
            light appeared to me; what was I going to do? I was going to kill
            a good, clever, noble man, who had done me no wrong, and by
            depriving his wife of happiness for the rest of her life, I
            should be torturing and killing her too. I lay thus in my bed
            with my face in the pillow, heedless how the time was passing.
            Suddenly my second, the ensign, came in with the pistols to fetch
            me.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“it's a
            good thing you are up already, it's time we were off, come
            along!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I did not know
            what to do and hurried to and fro undecided; we went out to the
            carriage, however.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Wait here a minute,”</span> I said to him.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll be back directly, I have forgotten
            my purse.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And I ran back
            alone, to Afanasy's little room.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Afanasy,”</span> I said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I
            gave you two blows on the face yesterday, forgive me,”</span> I
            said.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He started as
            though he were frightened, and looked at me; and I saw that it
            was not enough, and on the spot, in my full officer's uniform, I
            dropped at his feet and bowed my head to the ground.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Forgive me,”</span> I said.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then he was
            completely aghast.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Your honor ... sir, what are you doing? Am I worth
            it?”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page330">[pg
            330]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg330" name="Pg330"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And he burst
            out crying as I had done before, hid this face in his hands,
            turned to the window and shook all over with his sobs. I flew out
            to my comrade and jumped into the carriage.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ready,”</span> I cried. <span class="tei tei-q">“Have you ever seen a conqueror?”</span> I asked him.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Here is one before you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I was in
            ecstasy, laughing and talking all the way, I don't remember what
            about.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He looked at
            me. <span class="tei tei-q">“Well, brother, you are a plucky
            fellow, you'll keep up the honor of the uniform, I can
            see.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So we reached
            the place and found them there, waiting us. We were placed twelve
            paces apart; he had the first shot. I stood gayly, looking him
            full in the face; I did not twitch an eyelash, I looked lovingly
            at him, for I knew what I would do. His shot just grazed my cheek
            and ear.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thank God,”</span> I cried, <span class="tei tei-q">“no man has been killed,”</span> and I seized my
            pistol, turned back and flung it far away into the wood.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“That's the place for you,”</span> I
            cried.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I turned to my
            adversary.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Forgive me, young fool that I am, sir,”</span> I
            said, <span class="tei tei-q">“for my unprovoked insult to you
            and for forcing you to fire at me. I am ten times worse than you
            and more, maybe. Tell that to the person whom you hold dearest in
            the world.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I had no
            sooner said this than they all three shouted at me.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Upon my word,”</span> cried my adversary, annoyed,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“if you did not want to fight, why did
            not you let me alone?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yesterday I was a fool, to-day I know
            better,”</span> I answered him gayly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“As to yesterday, I believe you, but as for to-day,
            it is difficult to agree with your opinion,”</span> said he.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Bravo,”</span> I cried, clapping my hands.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I agree with you there too. I have
            deserved it!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Will you shoot, sir, or not?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I won't,”</span> I said; <span class="tei tei-q">“if you like, fire at me again, but it would be
            better for you not to fire.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The seconds,
            especially mine, were shouting too: <span class="tei tei-q">“Can
            you disgrace the regiment like this, facing your antagonist and
            begging his forgiveness! If I'd only known this!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I stood facing
            them all, not laughing now.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page331">[pg 331]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg331" name="Pg331"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen,”</span> I said, <span class="tei tei-q">“is it really so wonderful in these days to find a
            man who can repent of his stupidity and publicly confess his
            wrongdoing?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But not in a duel,”</span> cried my second
            again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's what's so strange,”</span> I said.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“For I ought to have owned my fault as
            soon as I got here, before he had fired a shot, before leading
            him into a great and deadly sin; but we have made our life so
            grotesque, that to act in that way would have been almost
            impossible, for only after I have faced his shot at the distance
            of twelve paces could my words have any significance for him, and
            if I had spoken before, he would have said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘He is a coward, the sight of the pistols has
            frightened him, no use to listen to him.’</span>
            Gentlemen,”</span> I cried suddenly, speaking straight from my
            heart, <span class="tei tei-q">“look around you at the gifts of
            God, the clear sky, the pure air, the tender grass, the birds;
            nature is beautiful and sinless, and we, only we, are sinful and
            foolish, and we don't understand that life is heaven, for we have
            only to understand that and it will at once be fulfilled in all
            its beauty, we shall embrace each other and weep.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I would have
            said more but I could not; my voice broke with the sweetness and
            youthful gladness of it, and there was such bliss in my heart as
            I had never known before in my life.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“All this as rational and edifying,”</span> said my
            antagonist, <span class="tei tei-q">“and in any case you are an
            original person.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You may laugh,”</span> I said to him, laughing too,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“but afterwards you will approve of
            me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, I am ready to approve of you now,”</span> said
            he; <span class="tei tei-q">“will you shake hands? for I believe
            you are genuinely sincere.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No,”</span> I said, <span class="tei tei-q">“not
            now, later on when I have grown worthier and deserve your esteem,
            then shake hands and you will do well.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">We went home,
            my second upbraiding me all the way, while I kissed him. All my
            comrades heard of the affair at once and gathered together to
            pass judgment on me the same day.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He has disgraced the uniform,”</span> they said;
            <span class="tei tei-q">“let him resign his
            commission.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Some stood up
            for me: <span class="tei tei-q">“He faced the shot,”</span> they
            said.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, but he was afraid of his other shot and begged
            for forgiveness.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If he had been afraid of being shot, he would have
            shot his own <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page332">[pg
            332]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg332" name="Pg332"></a>
            pistol first before asking forgiveness, while he flung it loaded
            into the forest. No, there's something else in this, something
            original.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I enjoyed
            listening and looking at them. <span class="tei tei-q">“My dear
            friends and comrades,”</span> said I, <span class="tei tei-q">“don't worry about my resigning my commission, for I
            have done so already. I have sent in my papers this morning and
            as soon as I get my discharge I shall go into a monastery—it's
            with that object I am leaving the regiment.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When I had
            said this every one of them burst out laughing.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You should have told us of that first, that explains
            everything, we can't judge a monk.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They laughed
            and could not stop themselves, and not scornfully, but kindly and
            merrily. They all felt friendly to me at once, even those who had
            been sternest in their censure, and all the following month,
            before my discharge came, they could not make enough of me.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, you monk,”</span> they would say.
            And every one said something kind to me, they began trying to
            dissuade me, even to pity me: <span class="tei tei-q">“What are
            you doing to yourself?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No,”</span> they would say, <span class="tei tei-q">“he is a brave fellow, he faced fire and could have
            fired his own pistol too, but he had a dream the night before
            that he should become a monk, that's why he did it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was the
            same thing with the society of the town. Till then I had been
            kindly received, but had not been the object of special
            attention, and now all came to know me at once and invited me;
            they laughed at me, but they loved me. I may mention that
            although everybody talked openly of our duel, the authorities
            took no notice of it, because my antagonist was a near relation
            of our general, and as there had been no bloodshed and no serious
            consequences, and as I resigned my commission, they took it as a
            joke. And I began then to speak aloud and fearlessly, regardless
            of their laughter, for it was always kindly and not spiteful
            laughter. These conversations mostly took place in the evenings,
            in the company of ladies; women particularly liked listening to
            me then and they made the men listen.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But how can I possibly be responsible for
            all?”</span> every one would laugh in my face. <span class="tei tei-q">“Can I, for instance, be responsible for
            you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You may well not know it,”</span> I would answer,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“since the whole world has long been
            going on a different line, since we consider the veriest lies as
            truth and demand the same lies from others. Here I have for once
            in my life acted sincerely and, well, you all look <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page333">[pg 333]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg333" name="Pg333"></a> upon me as a madman. Though
            you are friendly to me, yet, you see, you all laugh at
            me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But how can we help being friendly to you?”</span>
            said my hostess, laughing. The room was full of people. All of a
            sudden the young lady rose, on whose account the duel had been
            fought and whom only lately I had intended to be my future wife.
            I had not noticed her coming into the room. She got up, came to
            me and held out her hand.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let me tell you,”</span> she said, <span class="tei tei-q">“that I am the first not to laugh at you, but on the
            contrary I thank you with tears and express my respect for you
            for your action then.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Her husband,
            too, came up and then they all approached me and almost kissed
            me. My heart was filled with joy, but my attention was especially
            caught by a middle-aged man who came up to me with the others. I
            knew him by name already, but had never made his acquaintance nor
            exchanged a word with him till that evening.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">(d) The Mysterious
            Visitor</span></span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He had long
            been an official in the town; he was in a prominent position,
            respected by all, rich and had a reputation for benevolence. He
            subscribed considerable sums to the almshouse and the orphan
            asylum; he was very charitable, too, in secret, a fact which only
            became known after his death. He was a man of about fifty, almost
            stern in appearance and not much given to conversation. He had
            been married about ten years and his wife, who was still young,
            had borne him three children. Well, I was sitting alone in my
            room the following evening, when my door suddenly opened and this
            gentleman walked in.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I must
            mention, by the way, that I was no longer living in my former
            quarters. As soon as I resigned my commission, I took rooms with
            an old lady, the widow of a government clerk. My landlady's
            servant waited upon me, for I had moved into her rooms simply
            because on my return from the duel I had sent Afanasy back to the
            regiment, as I felt ashamed to look him in the face after my last
            interview with him. So prone is the man of the world to be
            ashamed of any righteous action.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I have,”</span> said my visitor, <span class="tei tei-q">“with great interest listened to you <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page334">[pg 334]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg334" name="Pg334"></a> speaking in different houses
            the last few days and I wanted at last to make your personal
            acquaintance, so as to talk to you more intimately. Can you, dear
            sir, grant me this favor?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I can, with the greatest pleasure, and I shall look
            upon it as an honor.”</span> I said this, though I felt almost
            dismayed, so greatly was I impressed from the first moment by the
            appearance of this man. For though other people had listened to
            me with interest and attention, no one had come to me before with
            such a serious, stern and concentrated expression. And now he had
            come to see me in my own rooms. He sat down.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are, I see, a man of great strength of
            character,”</span> he said; <span class="tei tei-q">“as you have
            dared to serve the truth, even when by doing so you risked
            incurring the contempt of all.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Your praise is, perhaps, excessive,”</span> I
            replied.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, it's not excessive,”</span> he answered;
            <span class="tei tei-q">“believe me, such a course of action is
            far more difficult than you think. It is that which has impressed
            me, and it is only on that account that I have come to
            you,”</span> he continued. <span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me,
            please, that is if you are not annoyed by my perhaps unseemly
            curiosity, what were your exact sensations, if you can recall
            them, at the moment when you made up your mind to ask forgiveness
            at the duel. Do not think my question frivolous; on the contrary,
            I have in asking the question a secret motive of my own, which I
            will perhaps explain to you later on, if it is God's will that we
            should become more intimately acquainted.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">All the while
            he was speaking, I was looking at him straight into the face and
            I felt all at once a complete trust in him and great curiosity on
            my side also, for I felt that there was some strange secret in
            his soul.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You ask what were my exact sensations at the moment
            when I asked my opponent's forgiveness,”</span> I answered;
            <span class="tei tei-q">“but I had better tell you from the
            beginning what I have not yet told any one else.”</span> And I
            described all that had passed between Afanasy and me, and how I
            had bowed down to the ground at his feet. <span class="tei tei-q">“From that you can see for yourself,”</span> I
            concluded, <span class="tei tei-q">“that at the time of the duel
            it was easier for me, for I had made a beginning already at home,
            and when once I had started on that road, to go farther along it
            was far from being difficult, but became a source of joy and
            happiness.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I liked the
            way he looked at me as he listened. <span class="tei tei-q">“All
            that,”</span> he <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page335">[pg
            335]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg335" name="Pg335"></a>
            said, <span class="tei tei-q">“is exceedingly interesting. I will
            come to see you again and again.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And from that
            time forth he came to see me nearly every evening. And we should
            have become greater friends, if only he had ever talked of
            himself. But about himself he scarcely ever said a word, yet
            continually asked me about myself. In spite of that I became very
            fond of him and spoke with perfect frankness to him about all my
            feelings; <span class="tei tei-q">“for,”</span> thought I,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“what need have I to know his secrets,
            since I can see without that that he is a good man? Moreover,
            though he is such a serious man and my senior, he comes to see a
            youngster like me and treats me as his equal.”</span> And I
            learned a great deal that was profitable from him, for he was a
            man of lofty mind.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That life is heaven,”</span> he said to me suddenly,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“that I have long been thinking
            about”</span>; and all at once he added, <span class="tei tei-q">“I think of nothing else indeed.”</span> He looked at
            me and smiled. <span class="tei tei-q">“I am more convinced of it
            than you are, I will tell you later why.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I listened to
            him and thought that he evidently wanted to tell me
            something.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Heaven,”</span> he went on, <span class="tei tei-q">“lies hidden within all of us—here it lies hidden in
            me now, and if I will it, it will be revealed to me to-morrow and
            for all time.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I looked at
            him; he was speaking with great emotion and gazing mysteriously
            at me, as if he were questioning me.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And that we are all responsible to all for all,
            apart from our own sins, you were quite right in thinking that,
            and it is wonderful how you could comprehend it in all its
            significance at once. And in very truth, so soon as men
            understand that, the Kingdom of Heaven will be for them not a
            dream, but a living reality.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And when,”</span> I cried out to him bitterly,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“when will that come to pass? and will it
            ever come to pass? Is not it simply a dream of ours?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What then, you don't believe it,”</span> he said.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“You preach it and don't believe it
            yourself. Believe me, this dream, as you call it, will come to
            pass without doubt; it will come, but not now, for every process
            has its law. It's a spiritual, psychological process. To
            transform the world, to recreate it afresh, men must turn into
            another path psychologically. Until you have become really, in
            actual fact, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page336">[pg
            336]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg336" name="Pg336"></a>
            a brother to every one, brotherhood will not come to pass. No
            sort of scientific teaching, no kind of common interest, will
            ever teach men to share property and privileges with equal
            consideration for all. Every one will think his share too small
            and they will be always envying, complaining and attacking one
            another. You ask when it will come to pass; it will come to pass,
            but first we have to go through the period of
            isolation.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean by isolation?”</span> I asked
            him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, the isolation that prevails everywhere, above
            all in our age—it has not fully developed, it has not reached its
            limit yet. For every one strives to keep his individuality as
            apart as possible, wishes to secure the greatest possible
            fullness of life for himself; but meantime all his efforts result
            not in attaining fullness of life but self-destruction, for
            instead of self-realization he ends by arriving at complete
            solitude. All mankind in our age have split up into units, they
            all keep apart, each in his own groove; each one holds aloof,
            hides himself and hides what he has, from the rest, and he ends
            by being repelled by others and repelling them. He heaps up
            riches by himself and thinks, <span class="tei tei-q">‘How strong
            I am now and how secure,’</span> and in his madness he does not
            understand that the more he heaps up, the more he sinks into
            self-destructive impotence. For he is accustomed to rely upon
            himself alone and to cut himself off from the whole; he has
            trained himself not to believe in the help of others, in men and
            in humanity, and only trembles for fear he should lose his money
            and the privileges that he has won for himself. Everywhere in
            these days men have, in their mockery, ceased to understand that
            the true security is to be found in social solidarity rather than
            in isolated individual effort. But this terrible individualism
            must inevitably have an end, and all will suddenly understand how
            unnaturally they are separated from one another. It will be the
            spirit of the time, and people will marvel that they have sat so
            long in darkness without seeing the light. And then the sign of
            the Son of Man will be seen in the heavens.... But, until then,
            we must keep the banner flying. Sometimes even if he has to do it
            alone, and his conduct seems to be crazy, a man must set an
            example, and so draw men's souls out of their solitude, and spur
            them to some act of brotherly love, that the great idea may not
            die.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Our evenings,
            one after another, were spent in such stirring and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page337">[pg 337]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg337" name="Pg337"></a> fervent talk. I gave up
            society and visited my neighbors much less frequently. Besides,
            my vogue was somewhat over. I say this, not as blame, for they
            still loved me and treated me good-humoredly, but there's no
            denying that fashion is a great power in society. I began to
            regard my mysterious visitor with admiration, for besides
            enjoying his intelligence, I began to perceive that he was
            brooding over some plan in his heart, and was preparing himself
            perhaps for a great deed. Perhaps he liked my not showing
            curiosity about his secret, not seeking to discover it by direct
            question nor by insinuation. But I noticed at last, that he
            seemed to show signs of wanting to tell me something. This had
            become quite evident, indeed, about a month after he first began
            to visit me.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you know,”</span> he said to me once,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“that people are very inquisitive about
            us in the town and wonder why I come to see you so often. But let
            them wonder, for <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">soon all will be
            explained</span></em>.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Sometimes an
            extraordinary agitation would come over him, and almost always on
            such occasions he would get up and go away. Sometimes he would
            fix a long piercing look upon me, and I thought, <span class="tei tei-q">“He will say something directly now.”</span> But he
            would suddenly begin talking of something ordinary and familiar.
            He often complained of headache too.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">One day, quite
            unexpectedly indeed, after he had been talking with great fervor
            a long time, I saw him suddenly turn pale, and his face worked
            convulsively, while he stared persistently at me.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What's the matter?”</span> I said; <span class="tei tei-q">“do you feel ill?”</span>—he had just been
            complaining of headache.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I ... do you know ... I murdered some
            one.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He said this
            and smiled with a face as white as chalk. <span class="tei tei-q">“Why is it he is smiling?”</span> The thought flashed
            through my mind before I realized anything else. I too turned
            pale.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What are you saying?”</span> I cried.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You see,”</span> he said, with a pale smile,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“how much it has cost me to say the first
            word. Now I have said it, I feel I've taken the first step and
            shall go on.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For a long
            while I could not believe him, and I did not believe him at that
            time, but only after he had been to see me three days running and
            told me all about it. I thought he was mad, but ended
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page338">[pg 338]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg338" name="Pg338"></a> by being
            convinced, to my great grief and amazement. His crime was a great
            and terrible one.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Fourteen years
            before, he had murdered the widow of a landowner, a wealthy and
            handsome young woman who had a house in our town. He fell
            passionately in love with her, declared his feeling and tried to
            persuade her to marry him. But she had already given her heart to
            another man, an officer of noble birth and high rank in the
            service, who was at that time away at the front, though she was
            expecting him soon to return. She refused his offer and begged
            him not to come and see her. After he had ceased to visit her, he
            took advantage of his knowledge of the house to enter at night
            through the garden by the roof, at great risk of discovery. But,
            as often happens, a crime committed with extraordinary audacity
            is more successful than others.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Entering the
            garret through the skylight, he went down the ladder, knowing
            that the door at the bottom of it was sometimes, through the
            negligence of the servants, left unlocked. He hoped to find it
            so, and so it was. He made his way in the dark to her bedroom,
            where a light was burning. As though on purpose, both her maids
            had gone off to a birthday-party in the same street, without
            asking leave. The other servants slept in the servants' quarters
            or in the kitchen on the ground-floor. His passion flamed up at
            the sight of her asleep, and then vindictive, jealous anger took
            possession of his heart, and like a drunken man, beside himself,
            he thrust a knife into her heart, so that she did not even cry
            out. Then with devilish and criminal cunning he contrived that
            suspicion should fall on the servants. He was so base as to take
            her purse, to open her chest with keys from under her pillow, and
            to take some things from it, doing it all as it might have been
            done by an ignorant servant, leaving valuable papers and taking
            only money. He took some of the larger gold things, but left
            smaller articles that were ten times as valuable. He took with
            him, too, some things for himself as remembrances, but of that
            later. Having done this awful deed, he returned by the way he had
            come.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Neither the
            next day, when the alarm was raised, nor at any time after in his
            life, did any one dream of suspecting that he was the criminal.
            No one indeed knew of his love for her, for he was always
            reserved and silent and had no friend to whom he would
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page339">[pg 339]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg339" name="Pg339"></a> have opened his
            heart. He was looked upon simply as an acquaintance, and not a
            very intimate one, of the murdered woman, as for the previous
            fortnight he had not even visited her. A serf of hers called
            Pyotr was at once suspected, and every circumstance confirmed the
            suspicion. The man knew—indeed his mistress did not conceal the
            fact—that having to send one of her serfs as a recruit she had
            decided to send him, as he had no relations and his conduct was
            unsatisfactory. People had heard him angrily threatening to
            murder her when he was drunk in a tavern. Two days before her
            death, he had run away, staying no one knew where in the town.
            The day after the murder, he was found on the road leading out of
            the town, dead drunk, with a knife in his pocket, and his right
            hand happened to be stained with blood. He declared that his nose
            had been bleeding, but no one believed him. The maids confessed
            that they had gone to a party and that the street-door had been
            left open till they returned. And a number of similar details
            came to light, throwing suspicion on the innocent servant.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They arrested
            him, and he was tried for the murder; but a week after the
            arrest, the prisoner fell sick of a fever and died unconscious in
            the hospital. There the matter ended and the judges and the
            authorities and every one in the town remained convinced that the
            crime had been committed by no one but the servant who had died
            in the hospital. And after that the punishment began.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">My mysterious
            visitor, now my friend, told me that at first he was not in the
            least troubled by pangs of conscience. He was miserable a long
            time, but not for that reason; only from regret that he had
            killed the woman he loved, that she was no more, that in killing
            her he had killed his love, while the fire of passion was still
            in his veins. But of the innocent blood he had shed, of the
            murder of a fellow creature, he scarcely thought. The thought
            that his victim might have become the wife of another man was
            insupportable to him, and so, for a long time, he was convinced
            in his conscience that he could not have acted otherwise.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At first he
            was worried at the arrest of the servant, but his illness and
            death soon set his mind at rest, for the man's death was
            apparently (so he reflected at the time) not owing to his arrest
            or his fright, but a chill he had taken on the day he ran away,
            when he had lain all night dead drunk on the damp ground. The
            theft of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page340">[pg
            340]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg340" name="Pg340"></a>
            the money and other things troubled him little, for he argued
            that the theft had not been committed for gain but to avert
            suspicion. The sum stolen was small, and he shortly afterwards
            subscribed the whole of it, and much more, towards the funds for
            maintaining an almshouse in the town. He did this on purpose to
            set his conscience at rest about the theft, and it's a remarkable
            fact that for a long time he really was at peace—he told me this
            himself. He entered then upon a career of great activity in the
            service, volunteered for a difficult and laborious duty, which
            occupied him two years, and being a man of strong will almost
            forgot the past. Whenever he recalled it, he tried not to think
            of it at all. He became active in philanthropy too, founded and
            helped to maintain many institutions in the town, did a good deal
            in the two capitals, and in both Moscow and Petersburg was
            elected a member of philanthropic societies.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At last,
            however, he began brooding over the past, and the strain of it
            was too much for him. Then he was attracted by a fine and
            intelligent girl and soon after married her, hoping that marriage
            would dispel his lonely depression, and that by entering on a new
            life and scrupulously doing his duty to his wife and children, he
            would escape from old memories altogether. But the very opposite
            of what he expected happened. He began, even in the first month
            of his marriage, to be continually fretted by the thought,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“My wife loves me—but what if she
            knew?”</span> When she first told him that she would soon bear
            him a child, he was troubled. <span class="tei tei-q">“I am
            giving life, but I have taken life.”</span> Children came.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“How dare I love them, teach and educate
            them, how can I talk to them of virtue? I have shed
            blood.”</span> They were splendid children, he longed to caress
            them; <span class="tei tei-q">“and I can't look at their innocent
            candid faces, I am unworthy.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At last he
            began to be bitterly and ominously haunted by the blood of his
            murdered victim, by the young life he had destroyed, by the blood
            that cried out for vengeance. He had begun to have awful dreams.
            But, being a man of fortitude, he bore his suffering a long time,
            thinking: <span class="tei tei-q">“I shall expiate everything by
            this secret agony.”</span> But that hope, too, was vain; the
            longer it went on, the more intense was his suffering.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He was
            respected in society for his active benevolence, though every one
            was overawed by his stern and gloomy character. But the more he
            was respected, the more intolerable it was for him. He
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page341">[pg 341]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg341" name="Pg341"></a> confessed to me
            that he had thoughts of killing himself. But he began to be
            haunted by another idea—an idea which he had at first regarded as
            impossible and unthinkable, though at last it got such a hold on
            his heart that he could not shake it off. He dreamed of rising
            up, going out and confessing in the face of all men that he had
            committed murder. For three years this dream had pursued him,
            haunting him in different forms. At last he believed with his
            whole heart that if he confessed his crime, he would heal his
            soul and would be at peace for ever. But this belief filled his
            heart with terror, for how could he carry it out? And then came
            what happened at my duel.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Looking at you, I have made up my mind.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I looked at
            him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Is it possible,”</span> I cried, clasping my hands,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“that such a trivial incident could give
            rise to such a resolution in you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“My resolution has been growing for the last three
            years,”</span> he answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“and your
            story only gave the last touch to it. Looking at you, I
            reproached myself and envied you.”</span> He said this to me
            almost sullenly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But you won't be believed,”</span> I observed;
            <span class="tei tei-q">“it's fourteen years ago.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I have proofs, great proofs. I shall show
            them.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then I cried
            and kissed him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me one thing, one thing,”</span> he said (as
            though it all depended upon me), <span class="tei tei-q">“my
            wife, my children! My wife may die of grief, and though my
            children won't lose their rank and property, they'll be a
            convict's children and for ever! And what a memory, what a memory
            of me I shall leave in their hearts!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I said
            nothing.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And to part from them, to leave them for ever? It's
            for ever, you know, for ever!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I sat still
            and repeated a silent prayer. I got up at last, I felt
            afraid.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well?”</span> He looked at me.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Go!”</span> said I, <span class="tei tei-q">“confess. Everything passes, only the truth remains.
            Your children will understand, when they grow up, the nobility of
            your resolution.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He left me
            that time as though he had made up his mind. Yet <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page342">[pg 342]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg342" name="Pg342"></a> for more than a fortnight
            afterwards, he came to me every evening, still preparing himself,
            still unable to bring himself to the point. He made my heart
            ache. One day he would come determined and say fervently:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I know it will be heaven for me, heaven, the moment
            I confess. Fourteen years I've been in hell. I want to suffer. I
            will take my punishment and begin to live. You can pass through
            the world doing wrong, but there's no turning back. Now I dare
            not love my neighbor nor even my own children. Good God, my
            children will understand, perhaps, what my punishment has cost me
            and will not condemn me! God is not in strength but in
            truth.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“All will understand your sacrifice,”</span> I said
            to him, <span class="tei tei-q">“if not at once, they will
            understand later; for you have served truth, the higher truth,
            not of the earth.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And he would
            go away seeming comforted, but next day he would come again,
            bitter, pale, sarcastic.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Every time I come to you, you look at me so
            inquisitively as though to say, <span class="tei tei-q">‘He has
            still not confessed!’</span> Wait a bit, don't despise me too
            much. It's not such an easy thing to do, as you would think.
            Perhaps I shall not do it at all. You won't go and inform against
            me then, will you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And far from
            looking at him with indiscreet curiosity, I was afraid to look at
            him at all. I was quite ill from anxiety, and my heart was full
            of tears. I could not sleep at night.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I have just come from my wife,”</span> he went on.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Do you understand what the word
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘wife’</span> means? When I went out, the
            children called to me, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Good-by, father,
            make haste back to read <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Children's Magazine</span></span> with
            us.’</span> No, you don't understand that! No one is wise from
            another man's woe.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">His eyes were
            glittering, his lips were twitching. Suddenly he struck the table
            with his fist so that everything on it danced—it was the first
            time he had done such a thing, he was such a mild man.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But need I?”</span> he exclaimed, <span class="tei tei-q">“must I? No one has been condemned, no one has been
            sent to Siberia in my place, the man died of fever. And I've been
            punished by my sufferings for the blood I shed. And I shan't be
            believed, they won't believe my proofs. Need I confess, need I? I
            am ready to go on suffering all my life <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page343">[pg 343]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg343" name="Pg343"></a> for the blood I have shed, if only my wife
            and children may be spared. Will it be just to ruin them with me?
            Aren't we making a mistake? What is right in this case? And will
            people recognize it, will they appreciate it, will they respect
            it?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Good Lord!”</span> I thought to myself, <span class="tei tei-q">“he is thinking of other people's respect at such a
            moment!”</span> And I felt so sorry for him then, that I believe
            I would have shared his fate if it could have comforted him. I
            saw he was beside himself. I was aghast, realizing with my heart
            as well as my mind what such a resolution meant.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Decide my fate!”</span> he exclaimed again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Go and confess,”</span> I whispered to him. My voice
            failed me, but I whispered it firmly. I took up the New Testament
            from the table, the Russian translation, and showed him the
            Gospel of St. John, chapter xii. verse 24:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of
            wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it
            die, it bringeth forth much fruit.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I had just
            been reading that verse when he came in. He read it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's true,”</span> he said, but he smiled
            bitterly. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's terrible the things you
            find in those books,”</span> he said, after a pause. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's easy enough to thrust them upon one. And who
            wrote them? Can they have been written by men?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The Holy Spirit wrote them,”</span> said I.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's easy for you to prate,”</span> he smiled again,
            this time almost with hatred.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I took the
            book again, opened it in another place and showed him the Epistle
            to the Hebrews, chapter x. verse 31. He read:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
            living God.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He read it and
            simply flung down the book. He was trembling all over.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“An awful text,”</span> he said. <span class="tei tei-q">“There's no denying you've picked out fitting
            ones.”</span> He rose from the chair. <span class="tei tei-q">“Well!”</span> he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“good-by, perhaps I shan't come again ... we shall
            meet in heaven. So I have been for fourteen years <span class="tei tei-q">‘in the hands of the living God,’</span> that's how
            one must think of those fourteen years. To-morrow I will beseech
            those hands to let me go.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I wanted to
            take him in my arms and kiss him, but I did not dare—his face was
            contorted and somber. He went away.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page344">[pg 344]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg344" name="Pg344"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Good God,”</span> I thought, <span class="tei tei-q">“what has he gone to face!”</span> I fell on my knees
            before the ikon and wept for him before the Holy Mother of God,
            our swift defender and helper. I was half an hour praying in
            tears, and it was late, about midnight. Suddenly I saw the door
            open and he came in again. I was surprised.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Where have you been?”</span> I asked him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I think,”</span> he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“I've forgotten something ... my handkerchief, I
            think.... Well, even if I've not forgotten anything, let me stay
            a little.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He sat down. I
            stood over him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You sit down, too,”</span> said he.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I sat down. We
            sat still for two minutes; he looked intently at me and suddenly
            smiled—I remembered that—then he got up, embraced me warmly and
            kissed me.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Remember,”</span> he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“how I came to you a second time. Do you hear,
            remember it!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And he went
            out.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To-morrow,”</span> I thought.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And so it was.
            I did not know that evening that the next day was his birthday. I
            had not been out for the last few days, so I had no chance of
            hearing it from any one. On that day he always had a great
            gathering, every one in the town went to it. It was the same this
            time. After dinner he walked into the middle of the room, with a
            paper in his hand—a formal declaration to the chief of his
            department who was present. This declaration he read aloud to the
            whole assembly. It contained a full account of the crime, in
            every detail.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I cut myself off from men as a monster. God has
            visited me,”</span> he said in conclusion. <span class="tei tei-q">“I want to suffer for my sin!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then he
            brought out and laid on the table all the things he had been
            keeping for fourteen years, that he thought would prove his
            crime, the jewels belonging to the murdered woman which he had
            stolen to divert suspicion, a cross and a locket taken from her
            neck with a portrait of her betrothed in the locket, her notebook
            and two letters; one from her betrothed, telling her that he
            would soon be with her, and her unfinished answer left on the
            table to be sent off next day. He carried off these two
            letters—what for? Why <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page345">[pg
            345]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg345" name="Pg345"></a>
            had he kept them for fourteen years afterwards instead of
            destroying them as evidence against him?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And this is
            what happened: every one was amazed and horrified, every one
            refused to believe it and thought that he was deranged, though
            all listened with intense curiosity. A few days later it was
            fully decided and agreed in every house that the unhappy man was
            mad. The legal authorities could not refuse to take the case up,
            but they too dropped it. Though the trinkets and letters made
            them ponder, they decided that even if they did turn out to be
            authentic, no charge could be based on those alone. Besides, she
            might have given him those things as a friend, or asked him to
            take care of them for her. I heard afterwards, however, that the
            genuineness of the things was proved by the friends and relations
            of the murdered woman, and that there was no doubt about them.
            Yet nothing was destined to come of it, after all.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Five days
            later, all had heard that he was ill and that his life was in
            danger. The nature of his illness I can't explain, they said it
            was an affection of the heart. But it became known that the
            doctors had been induced by his wife to investigate his mental
            condition also, and had come to the conclusion that it was a case
            of insanity. I betrayed nothing, though people ran to question
            me. But when I wanted to visit him, I was for a long while
            forbidden to do so, above all by his wife.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's you who have caused his illness,”</span> she
            said to me; <span class="tei tei-q">“he was always gloomy, but
            for the last year people noticed that he was peculiarly excited
            and did strange things, and now you have been the ruin of him.
            Your preaching has brought him to this; for the last month he was
            always with you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Indeed, not
            only his wife but the whole town were down upon me and blamed me.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“It's all your doing,”</span> they said.
            I was silent and indeed rejoiced at heart, for I saw plainly
            God's mercy to the man who had turned against himself and
            punished himself. I could not believe in his insanity.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They let me
            see him at last, he insisted upon saying good-by to me. I went in
            to him and saw at once, that not only his days, but his hours
            were numbered. He was weak, yellow, his hands trembled, he gasped
            for breath, but his face was full of tender and happy
            feeling.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page346">[pg
            346]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg346" name="Pg346"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It is done!”</span> he said. <span class="tei tei-q">“I've long been yearning to see you, why didn't you
            come?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I did not tell
            him that they would not let me see him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“God has had pity on me and is calling me to Himself.
            I know I am dying, but I feel joy and peace for the first time
            after so many years. There was heaven in my heart from the moment
            I had done what I had to do. Now I dare to love my children and
            to kiss them. Neither my wife nor the judges, nor any one has
            believed it. My children will never believe it either. I see in
            that God's mercy to them. I shall die, and my name will be
            without a stain for them. And now I feel God near, my heart
            rejoices as in Heaven ... I have done my duty.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He could not
            speak, he gasped for breath, he pressed my hand warmly, looking
            fervently at me. We did not talk for long, his wife kept peeping
            in at us. But he had time to whisper to me:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you remember how I came back to you that second
            time, at midnight? I told you to remember it. You know what I
            came back for? I came to kill you!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I started.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I went out from you then into the darkness, I
            wandered about the streets, struggling with myself. And suddenly
            I hated you so that I could hardly bear it. Now, I thought, he is
            all that binds me, and he is my judge. I can't refuse to face my
            punishment to-morrow, for he knows all. It was not that I was
            afraid you would betray me (I never even thought of that), but I
            thought, <span class="tei tei-q">‘How can I look him in the face
            if I don't confess?’</span> And if you had been at the other end
            of the earth, but alive, it would have been all the same, the
            thought was unendurable that you were alive knowing everything
            and condemning me. I hated you as though you were the cause, as
            though you were to blame for everything. I came back to you then,
            remembering that you had a dagger lying on your table. I sat down
            and asked you to sit down, and for a whole minute I pondered. If
            I had killed you, I should have been ruined by that murder even
            if I had not confessed the other. But I didn't think about that
            at all, and I didn't want to think of it at that moment. I only
            hated you and longed to revenge myself on you for everything. The
            Lord vanquished the devil in my heart. But let me tell you, you
            were never nearer death.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page347">[pg 347]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg347" name="Pg347"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A week later
            he died. The whole town followed him to the grave. The chief
            priest made a speech full of feeling. All lamented the terrible
            illness that had cut short his days. But all the town was up in
            arms against me after the funeral, and people even refused to see
            me. Some, at first a few and afterwards more, began indeed to
            believe in the truth of his story, and they visited me and
            questioned me with great interest and eagerness, for man loves to
            see the downfall and disgrace of the righteous. But I held my
            tongue, and very shortly after, I left the town, and five months
            later by God's grace I entered upon the safe and blessed path,
            praising the unseen finger which had guided me so clearly to it.
            But I remember in my prayer to this day, the servant of God,
            Mihail, who suffered so greatly.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 3.00em; margin-bottom: 3.00em">
<a id="toc97" name="toc97"></a> <a id="pdf98" name="pdf98"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
