<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-1-3" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-1-3-6" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter VI. Smerdyakov</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He did in fact
            find his father still at table. Though there was a dining-room in
            the house, the table was laid as usual in the drawing-room, which
            was the largest room, and furnished with old-fashioned
            ostentation. The furniture was white and very old, upholstered in
            old, red, silky material. In the spaces between the windows there
            were mirrors in elaborate white and gilt frames, of old-fashioned
            carving. On the walls, covered with white paper, which was torn
            in many places, there hung two large portraits—one of some prince
            who had been governor of the district thirty years before, and
            the other of some bishop, also long since dead. In the corner
            opposite the door there were several ikons, before which a lamp
            was lighted at nightfall ... not so much for devotional purposes
            as to light the room. Fyodor Pavlovitch used to go to
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page132">[pg 132]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg132" name="Pg132"></a> bed very late, at
            three or four o'clock in the morning, and would wander about the
            room at night or sit in an arm-chair, thinking. This had become a
            habit with him. He often slept quite alone in the house, sending
            his servants to the lodge; but usually Smerdyakov remained,
            sleeping on a bench in the hall.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When Alyosha
            came in, dinner was over, but coffee and preserves had been
            served. Fyodor Pavlovitch liked sweet things with brandy after
            dinner. Ivan was also at table, sipping coffee. The servants,
            Grigory and Smerdyakov, were standing by. Both the gentlemen and
            the servants seemed in singularly good spirits. Fyodor Pavlovitch
            was roaring with laughter. Before he entered the room, Alyosha
            heard the shrill laugh he knew so well, and could tell from the
            sound of it that his father had only reached the good-humored
            stage, and was far from being completely drunk.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here he is! Here he is!”</span> yelled Fyodor
            Pavlovitch, highly delighted at seeing Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“Join us. Sit down. Coffee is a lenten dish, but it's
            hot and good. I don't offer you brandy, you're keeping the fast.
            But would you like some? No; I'd better give you some of our
            famous liqueur. Smerdyakov, go to the cupboard, the second shelf
            on the right. Here are the keys. Look sharp!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha began
            refusing the liqueur.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Never mind. If you won't have it, we will,”</span>
            said Fyodor Pavlovitch, beaming. <span class="tei tei-q">“But
            stay—have you dined?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes,”</span> answered Alyosha, who had in truth only
            eaten a piece of bread and drunk a glass of kvas in the Father
            Superior's kitchen. <span class="tei tei-q">“Though I should be
            pleased to have some hot coffee.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Bravo, my darling! He'll have some coffee. Does it
            want warming? No, it's boiling. It's capital coffee: Smerdyakov's
            making. My Smerdyakov's an artist at coffee and at fish patties,
            and at fish soup, too. You must come one day and have some fish
            soup. Let me know beforehand.... But, stay; didn't I tell you
            this morning to come home with your mattress and pillow and all?
            Have you brought your mattress? He he he!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I haven't,”</span> said Alyosha, smiling,
            too.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, but you were frightened, you were frightened
            this morning, weren't you? There, my darling, I couldn't do
            anything to vex you. Do you know, Ivan, I can't resist the way he
            looks one straight in the face and laughs? It makes me laugh all
            over. I'm so fond <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page133">[pg
            133]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg133" name="Pg133"></a>
            of him. Alyosha, let me give you my blessing—a father's
            blessing.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha rose,
            but Fyodor Pavlovitch had already changed his mind.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, no,”</span> he said. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll just make the sign of the cross over you, for
            now. Sit still. Now we've a treat for you, in your own line, too.
            It'll make you laugh. Balaam's ass has begun talking to us
            here—and how he talks! How he talks!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Balaam's ass,
            it appeared, was the valet, Smerdyakov. He was a young man of
            about four and twenty, remarkably unsociable and taciturn. Not
            that he was shy or bashful. On the contrary, he was conceited and
            seemed to despise everybody.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But we must
            pause to say a few words about him now. He was brought up by
            Grigory and Marfa, but the boy grew up <span class="tei tei-q">“with no sense of gratitude,”</span> as Grigory
            expressed it; he was an unfriendly boy, and seemed to look at the
            world mistrustfully. In his childhood he was very fond of hanging
            cats, and burying them with great ceremony. He used to dress up
            in a sheet as though it were a surplice, and sang, and waved some
            object over the dead cat as though it were a censer. All this he
            did on the sly, with the greatest secrecy. Grigory caught him
            once at this diversion and gave him a sound beating. He shrank
            into a corner and sulked there for a week. <span class="tei tei-q">“He doesn't care for you or me, the monster,”</span>
            Grigory used to say to Marfa, <span class="tei tei-q">“and he
            doesn't care for any one. Are you a human being?”</span> he said,
            addressing the boy directly. <span class="tei tei-q">“You're not
            a human being. You grew from the mildew in the bath-house.<a href="#note_2" id="noteref_2" name="noteref_2"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">2</span></span></a>
            That's what you are.”</span> Smerdyakov, it appeared afterwards,
            could never forgive him those words. Grigory taught him to read
            and write, and when he was twelve years old, began teaching him
            the Scriptures. But this teaching came to nothing. At the second
            or third lesson the boy suddenly grinned.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What's that for?”</span> asked Grigory, looking at
            him threateningly from under his spectacles.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, nothing. God created light on the first day, and
            the sun, moon, and stars on the fourth day. Where did the light
            come from on the first day?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Grigory was
            thunderstruck. The boy looked sarcastically at his teacher. There
            was something positively condescending in his expression.
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page134">[pg 134]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg134" name="Pg134"></a> Grigory could not
            restrain himself. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll show you
            where!”</span> he cried, and gave the boy a violent slap on the
            cheek. The boy took the slap without a word, but withdrew into
            his corner again for some days. A week later he had his first
            attack of the disease to which he was subject all the rest of his
            life—epilepsy. When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of it, his attitude
            to the boy seemed changed at once. Till then he had taken no
            notice of him, though he never scolded him, and always gave him a
            copeck when he met him. Sometimes, when he was in good humor, he
            would send the boy something sweet from his table. But as soon as
            he heard of his illness, he showed an active interest in him,
            sent for a doctor, and tried remedies, but the disease turned out
            to be incurable. The fits occurred, on an average, once a month,
            but at various intervals. The fits varied too, in violence: some
            were light and some were very severe. Fyodor Pavlovitch strictly
            forbade Grigory to use corporal punishment to the boy, and began
            allowing him to come upstairs to him. He forbade him to be taught
            anything whatever for a time, too. One day when the boy was about
            fifteen, Fyodor Pavlovitch noticed him lingering by the bookcase,
            and reading the titles through the glass. Fyodor Pavlovitch had a
            fair number of books—over a hundred—but no one ever saw him
            reading. He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of the bookcase.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Come, read. You shall be my librarian.
            You'll be better sitting reading than hanging about the
            courtyard. Come, read this,”</span> and Fyodor Pavlovitch gave
            him <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Evenings in a Cottage near
            Dikanka</span></span>.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He read a
            little but didn't like it. He did not once smile, and ended by
            frowning.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why? Isn't it funny?”</span> asked Fyodor
            Pavlovitch.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov did
            not speak.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Answer, stupid!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's all untrue,”</span> mumbled the boy, with a
            grin.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then go to the devil! You have the soul of a lackey.
            Stay, here's Smaragdov's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Universal History</span></span>. That's all
            true. Read that.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Smerdyakov
            did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov. He thought it dull.
            So the bookcase was closed again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Shortly
            afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch that
            Smerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinary
            fastidiousness. He would sit before his soup, take up his
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page135">[pg 135]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg135" name="Pg135"></a> spoon and look
            into the soup, bend over it, examine it, take a spoonful and hold
            it to the light.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What is it? A beetle?”</span> Grigory would ask.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“A fly, perhaps,”</span> observed Marfa.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The squeamish
            youth never answered, but he did the same with his bread, his
            meat, and everything he ate. He would hold a piece on his fork to
            the light, scrutinize it microscopically, and only after long
            deliberation decide to put it in his mouth.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ach! What fine gentlemen's airs!”</span> Grigory
            muttered, looking at him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">When Fyodor
            Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov he determined
            to make him his cook, and sent him to Moscow to be trained. He
            spent some years there and came back remarkably changed in
            appearance. He looked extraordinarily old for his age. His face
            had grown wrinkled, yellow, and strangely emasculate. In
            character he seemed almost exactly the same as before he went
            away. He was just as unsociable, and showed not the slightest
            inclination for any companionship. In Moscow, too, as we heard
            afterwards, he had always been silent. Moscow itself had little
            interest for him; he saw very little there, and took scarcely any
            notice of anything. He went once to the theater, but returned
            silent and displeased with it. On the other hand, he came back to
            us from Moscow well dressed, in a clean coat and clean linen. He
            brushed his clothes most scrupulously twice a day invariably, and
            was very fond of cleaning his smart calf boots with a special
            English polish, so that they shone like mirrors. He turned out a
            first-rate cook. Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him a salary, almost the
            whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes, pomade, perfumes, and
            such things. But he seemed to have as much contempt for the
            female sex as for men; he was discreet, almost unapproachable,
            with them. Fyodor Pavlovitch began to regard him rather
            differently. His fits were becoming more frequent, and on the
            days he was ill Marfa cooked, which did not suit Fyodor
            Pavlovitch at all.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why are your fits getting worse?”</span> asked
            Fyodor Pavlovitch, looking askance at his new cook. <span class="tei tei-q">“Would you like to get married? Shall I find you a
            wife?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Smerdyakov
            turned pale with anger, and made no reply. Fyodor Pavlovitch left
            him with an impatient gesture. The great <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page136">[pg 136]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg136" name="Pg136"></a> thing was that he had absolute confidence
            in his honesty. It happened once, when Fyodor Pavlovitch was
            drunk, that he dropped in the muddy courtyard three
            hundred-rouble notes which he had only just received. He only
            missed them next day, and was just hastening to search his
            pockets when he saw the notes lying on the table. Where had they
            come from? Smerdyakov had picked them up and brought them in the
            day before.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, my lad, I've never met any one like
            you,”</span> Fyodor Pavlovitch said shortly, and gave him ten
            roubles. We may add that he not only believed in his honesty, but
            had, for some reason, a liking for him, although the young man
            looked as morosely at him as at every one and was always silent.
            He rarely spoke. If it had occurred to any one to wonder at the
            time what the young man was interested in, and what was in his
            mind, it would have been impossible to tell by looking at him.
            Yet he used sometimes to stop suddenly in the house, or even in
            the yard or street, and would stand still for ten minutes, lost
            in thought. A physiognomist studying his face would have said
            that there was no thought in it, no reflection, but only a sort
            of contemplation. There is a remarkable picture by the painter
            Kramskoy, called <span class="tei tei-q">“Contemplation.”</span>
            There is a forest in winter, and on a roadway through the forest,
            in absolute solitude, stands a peasant in a torn kaftan and bark
            shoes. He stands, as it were, lost in thought. Yet he is not
            thinking; he is <span class="tei tei-q">“contemplating.”</span>
            If any one touched him he would start and look at one as though
            awakening and bewildered. It's true he would come to himself
            immediately; but if he were asked what he had been thinking
            about, he would remember nothing. Yet probably he has, hidden
            within himself, the impression which had dominated him during the
            period of contemplation. Those impressions are dear to him and no
            doubt he hoards them imperceptibly, and even unconsciously. How
            and why, of course, he does not know either. He may suddenly,
            after hoarding impressions for many years, abandon everything and
            go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for his soul's salvation, or
            perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his native village, and
            perhaps do both. There are a good many <span class="tei tei-q">“contemplatives”</span> among the peasantry. Well,
            Smerdyakov was probably one of them, and he probably was greedily
            hoarding up his impressions, hardly knowing why.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page137">[pg 137]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg137" name="Pg137"></a>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 3.00em; margin-bottom: 3.00em">
<a id="toc47" name="toc47"></a> <a id="pdf48" name="pdf48"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
