<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-2-2" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-2-2-2" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter II. Smerdyakov With A
            Guitar</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He had no time
            to lose indeed. Even while he was saying good-by to Lise, the
            thought had struck him that he must attempt some stratagem to
            find his brother Dmitri, who was evidently keeping out of his
            way. It was getting late, nearly three o'clock. Alyosha's whole
            soul turned to the monastery, to his dying saint, but the
            necessity of seeing Dmitri outweighed everything. The conviction
            that a great inevitable catastrophe was about to happen grew
            stronger in Alyosha's mind with every hour. What that catastrophe
            was, and what he would say at that moment to his brother, he
            could perhaps not have said definitely. <span class="tei tei-q">“Even if my benefactor must die without me, anyway I
            won't have to reproach myself all my life with the thought that I
            might have saved something and did not, but passed by and
            hastened home. If I do as I intend, I shall be following his
            great precept.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">His plan was
            to catch his brother Dmitri unawares, to climb over the fence, as
            he had the day before, get into the garden and sit in the
            summer-house. If Dmitri were not there, thought Alyosha, he would
            not announce himself to Foma or the women of the house, but would
            remain hidden in the summer-house, even if he had to wait there
            till evening. If, as before, Dmitri were lying in wait for
            Grushenka to come, he would be very likely to come to the
            summer-house. Alyosha did not, however, give much thought to the
            details of his plan, but resolved to act upon it, even if it
            meant not getting back to the monastery that day.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Everything
            happened without hindrance, he climbed over the hurdle almost in
            the same spot as the day before, and stole into the summer-house
            unseen. He did not want to be noticed. The woman of the house and
            Foma too, if he were here, might be loyal to his brother and obey
            his instructions, and so refuse to let Alyosha come <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page244">[pg 244]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg244" name="Pg244"></a> into the garden, or might
            warn Dmitri that he was being sought and inquired for.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was no
            one in the summer-house. Alyosha sat down and began to wait. He
            looked round the summer-house, which somehow struck him as a
            great deal more ancient than before. Though the day was just as
            fine as yesterday, it seemed a wretched little place this time.
            There was a circle on the table, left no doubt from the glass of
            brandy having been spilt the day before. Foolish and irrelevant
            ideas strayed about his mind, as they always do in a time of
            tedious waiting. He wondered, for instance, why he had sat down
            precisely in the same place as before, why not in the other seat.
            At last he felt very depressed—depressed by suspense and
            uncertainty. But he had not sat there more than a quarter of an
            hour, when he suddenly heard the thrum of a guitar somewhere
            quite close. People were sitting, or had only just sat down,
            somewhere in the bushes not more than twenty paces away. Alyosha
            suddenly recollected that on coming out of the summer-house the
            day before, he had caught a glimpse of an old green low
            garden-seat among the bushes on the left, by the fence. The
            people must be sitting on it now. Who were they?</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A man's voice
            suddenly began singing in a sugary falsetto, accompanying himself
            on the guitar:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">With invincible force</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">I am bound to my dear.</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">O Lord, have mercy</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">On her and on me!</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">On her and on me!</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">On her and on me!</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The voice
            ceased. It was a lackey's tenor and a lackey's song. Another
            voice, a woman's, suddenly asked insinuatingly and bashfully,
            though with mincing affectation:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why haven't you been to see us for so long, Pavel
            Fyodorovitch? Why do you always look down upon us?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Not at all,”</span> answered a man's voice politely,
            but with emphatic dignity. It was clear that the man had the best
            of the position, and that the woman was making advances.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I believe the man must be
            Smerdyakov,”</span> thought Alyosha, <span class="tei tei-q">“from his voice. And <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page245">[pg 245]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg245" name="Pg245"></a> the lady must be the daughter of the house
            here, who has come from Moscow, the one who wears the dress with
            a tail and goes to Marfa for soup.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am awfully fond of verses of all kinds, if they
            rhyme,”</span> the woman's voice continued. <span class="tei tei-q">“Why don't you go on?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The man sang
            again:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">What do I care for royal
                  wealth</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">If but my dear one be in
                  health?</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Lord have mercy</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">On her and on me!</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">On her and on me!</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">On her and on me!</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It was even better last time,”</span> observed the
            woman's voice. <span class="tei tei-q">“You sang <span class="tei tei-q">‘If my darling be in health’</span>; it sounded more
            tender. I suppose you've forgotten to-day.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Poetry is rubbish!”</span> said Smerdyakov
            curtly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no! I am very fond of poetry.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“So far as it's poetry, it's essential rubbish.
            Consider yourself, who ever talks in rhyme? And if we were all to
            talk in rhyme, even though it were decreed by government, we
            shouldn't say much, should we? Poetry is no good, Marya
            Kondratyevna.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How clever you are! How is it you've gone so deep
            into everything?”</span> The woman's voice was more and more
            insinuating.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I could have done better than that. I could have
            known more than that, if it had not been for my destiny from my
            childhood up. I would have shot a man in a duel if he called me
            names because I am descended from a filthy beggar and have no
            father. And they used to throw it in my teeth in Moscow. It had
            reached them from here, thanks to Grigory Vassilyevitch. Grigory
            Vassilyevitch blames me for rebelling against my birth, but I
            would have sanctioned their killing me before I was born that I
            might not have come into the world at all. They used to say in
            the market, and your mamma too, with great lack of delicacy, set
            off telling me that her hair was like a mat on her head, and that
            she was short of five foot by a wee bit. Why talk of a wee bit
            while she might have said <span class="tei tei-q">‘a little
            bit,’</span> like every one else? She wanted to make it touching,
            a regular peasant's feeling. Can a Russian peasant be said to
            feel, in comparison with <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page246">[pg 246]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg246" name="Pg246"></a> an educated man? He can't be said to have
            feeling at all, in his ignorance. From my childhood up when I
            hear <span class="tei tei-q">‘a wee bit,’</span> I am ready to
            burst with rage. I hate all Russia, Marya
            Kondratyevna.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If you'd been a cadet in the army, or a young
            hussar, you wouldn't have talked like that, but would have drawn
            your saber to defend all Russia.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't want to be a hussar, Marya Kondratyevna,
            and, what's more, I should like to abolish all
            soldiers.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And when an enemy comes, who is going to defend
            us?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There's no need of defense. In 1812 there was a
            great invasion of Russia by Napoleon, first Emperor of the
            French, father of the present one, and it would have been a good
            thing if they had conquered us. A clever nation would have
            conquered a very stupid one and annexed it. We should have had
            quite different institutions.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Are they so much better in their own country than we
            are? I wouldn't change a dandy I know of for three young
            Englishmen,”</span> observed Marya Kondratyevna tenderly,
            doubtless accompanying her words with a most languishing
            glance.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's as one prefers.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But you are just like a foreigner—just like a most
            gentlemanly foreigner. I tell you that, though it makes me
            bashful.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If you care to know, the folks there and ours here
            are just alike in their vice. They are swindlers, only there the
            scoundrel wears polished boots and here he grovels in filth and
            sees no harm in it. The Russian people want thrashing, as Fyodor
            Pavlovitch said very truly yesterday, though he is mad, and all
            his children.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You said yourself you had such a respect for Ivan
            Fyodorovitch.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But he said I was a stinking lackey. He thinks that
            I might be unruly. He is mistaken there. If I had a certain sum
            in my pocket, I would have left here long ago. Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch is lower than any lackey in his behavior, in his
            mind, and in his poverty. He doesn't know how to do anything, and
            yet he is respected by every one. I may be only a soup-maker, but
            with luck I could open a café restaurant in Petrovka, in Moscow,
            for my cookery is something special, and there's no one in
            Moscow, except the foreigners, whose cookery is anything special.
            Dmitri Fyodorovitch is a beggar, but if he were to challenge the
            son of the first count in the country, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page247">[pg 247]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg247" name="Pg247"></a> he'd fight him. Though in what way is he
            better than I am? For he is ever so much stupider than I am. Look
            at the money he has wasted without any need!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It must be lovely, a duel,”</span> Marya
            Kondratyevna observed suddenly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How so?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It must be so dreadful and so brave, especially when
            young officers with pistols in their hands pop at one another for
            the sake of some lady. A perfect picture! Ah, if only girls were
            allowed to look on, I'd give anything to see one!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's all very well when you are firing at some one,
            but when he is firing straight in your mug, you must feel pretty
            silly. You'd be glad to run away, Marya Kondratyevna.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You don't mean you would run away?”</span> But
            Smerdyakov did not deign to reply. After a moment's silence the
            guitar tinkled again, and he sang again in the same falsetto:</p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Whatever you may say,</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">I shall go far away.</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Life will be bright and
                  gay</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">In the city far away.</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">I shall not grieve,</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">I shall not grieve at
                  all,</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">I don't intend to grieve at
                  all.</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then something
            unexpected happened. Alyosha suddenly sneezed. They were silent.
            Alyosha got up and walked towards them. He found Smerdyakov
            dressed up and wearing polished boots, his hair pomaded, and
            perhaps curled. The guitar lay on the garden-seat. His companion
            was the daughter of the house, wearing a light-blue dress with a
            train two yards long. She was young and would not have been
            bad-looking, but that her face was so round and terribly
            freckled.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Will my brother Dmitri soon be back?”</span> asked
            Alyosha with as much composure as he could.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov got
            up slowly; Marya Kondratyevna rose too.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How am I to know about Dmitri Fyodorovitch? It's not
            as if I were his keeper,”</span> answered Smerdyakov quietly,
            distinctly, and superciliously.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page248">[pg 248]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg248" name="Pg248"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I simply asked whether you do know?”</span>
            Alyosha explained.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I know nothing of his whereabouts and don't want
            to.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But my brother told me that you let him know all
            that goes on in the house, and promised to let him know when
            Agrafena Alexandrovna comes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Smerdyakov
            turned a deliberate, unmoved glance upon him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And how did you get in this time, since the gate was
            bolted an hour ago?”</span> he asked, looking at Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I came in from the back-alley, over the fence, and
            went straight to the summer-house. I hope you'll forgive
            me,”</span> he added, addressing Marya Kondratyevna. <span class="tei tei-q">“I was in a hurry to find my brother.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ach, as though we could take it amiss in
            you!”</span> drawled Marya Kondratyevna, flattered by Alyosha's
            apology. <span class="tei tei-q">“For Dmitri Fyodorovitch often
            goes to the summer-house in that way. We don't know he is here
            and he is sitting in the summer-house.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am very anxious to find him, or to learn from you
            where he is now. Believe me, it's on business of great importance
            to him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He never tells us,”</span> lisped Marya
            Kondratyevna.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Though I used to come here as a friend,”</span>
            Smerdyakov began again, <span class="tei tei-q">“Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch has pestered me in a merciless way even here by his
            incessant questions about the master. <span class="tei tei-q">‘What news?’</span> he'll ask. <span class="tei tei-q">‘What's going on in there now? Who's coming and
            going?’</span> and can't I tell him something more. Twice already
            he's threatened me with death.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“With death?”</span> Alyosha exclaimed in
            surprise.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you suppose he'd think much of that, with his
            temper, which you had a chance of observing yourself yesterday?
            He says if I let Agrafena Alexandrovna in and she passes the
            night there, I'll be the first to suffer for it. I am terribly
            afraid of him, and if I were not even more afraid of doing so, I
            ought to let the police know. God only knows what he might not
            do!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“His honor said to him the other day, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I'll pound you in a mortar!’</span> ”</span> added
            Marya Kondratyevna.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, if it's pounding in a mortar, it may be only
            talk,”</span> observed Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“If I
            could meet him, I might speak to him about that too.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, the only thing I can tell you is this,”</span>
            said Smerdyakov, as though thinking better of it; <span class="tei tei-q">“I am here as an old friend and neighbor,
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page249">[pg 249]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg249" name="Pg249"></a> and it would be
            odd if I didn't come. On the other hand, Ivan Fyodorovitch sent
            me first thing this morning to your brother's lodging in Lake
            Street, without a letter, but with a message to Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch to go to dine with him at the restaurant here, in
            the market-place. I went, but didn't find Dmitri Fyodorovitch at
            home, though it was eight o'clock. <span class="tei tei-q">‘He's
            been here, but he is quite gone,’</span> those were the very
            words of his landlady. It's as though there was an understanding
            between them. Perhaps at this moment he is in the restaurant with
            Ivan Fyodorovitch, for Ivan Fyodorovitch has not been home to
            dinner and Fyodor Pavlovitch dined alone an hour ago, and is gone
            to lie down. But I beg you most particularly not to speak of me
            and of what I have told you, for he'd kill me for nothing at
            all.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Brother Ivan invited Dmitri to the restaurant
            to-day?”</span> repeated Alyosha quickly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's so.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The Metropolis tavern in the
            market-place?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The very same.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's quite likely,”</span> cried Alyosha, much
            excited. <span class="tei tei-q">“Thank you, Smerdyakov; that's
            important. I'll go there at once.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't betray me,”</span> Smerdyakov called after
            him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no, I'll go to the tavern as though by chance.
            Don't be anxious.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But wait a minute, I'll open the gate to
            you,”</span> cried Marya Kondratyevna.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No; it's a short cut, I'll get over the fence
            again.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">What he had
            heard threw Alyosha into great agitation. He ran to the tavern.
            It was impossible for him to go into the tavern in his monastic
            dress, but he could inquire at the entrance for his brothers and
            call them down. But just as he reached the tavern, a window was
            flung open, and his brother Ivan called down to him from it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, can't you come up here to me? I shall be
            awfully grateful.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To be sure I can, only I don't quite know whether in
            this dress—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I am in a room apart. Come up the steps; I'll
            run down to meet you.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page250">[pg 250]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg250" name="Pg250"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A minute later
            Alyosha was sitting beside his brother. Ivan was alone
            dining.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em">
<a id="toc81" name="toc81"></a> <a id="pdf82" name="pdf82"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
