<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-3-3" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-3-3-6" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter VI. The Prosecutor Catches
            Mitya</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Something
            utterly unexpected and amazing to Mitya followed. He could never,
            even a minute before, have conceived that any one could behave
            like that to him, Mitya Karamazov. What was worst of all, there
            was something humiliating in it, and on their side something
            <span class="tei tei-q">“supercilious and scornful.”</span> It
            was nothing to take off his coat, but he was asked to undress
            further, or rather not asked but <span class="tei tei-q">“commanded,”</span> he quite understood that. From
            pride and contempt he submitted without a word. Several peasants
            accompanied the lawyers and remained on the same side of the
            curtain. <span class="tei tei-q">“To be ready if force is
            required,”</span> thought Mitya, <span class="tei tei-q">“and
            perhaps for some other reason, too.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, must I take off my shirt, too?”</span> he
            asked sharply, but Nikolay Parfenovitch did not answer. He was
            busily engaged with the prosecutor in examining the coat, the
            trousers, the waistcoat and the cap; and it was evident that they
            were both much interested in the scrutiny. <span class="tei tei-q">“They make no bones about it,”</span> thought Mitya,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“they don't keep up the most elementary
            politeness.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I ask you for the second time—need I take off my
            shirt or not?”</span> he said, still more sharply and
            irritably.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't trouble yourself. We will tell you what to
            do,”</span> Nikolay Parfenovitch said, and his voice was
            positively peremptory, or so it seemed to Mitya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Meantime a
            consultation was going on in undertones between the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page544">[pg 544]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg544" name="Pg544"></a> lawyers. There turned out to
            be on the coat, especially on the left side at the back, a huge
            patch of blood, dry, and still stiff. There were bloodstains on
            the trousers, too. Nikolay Parfenovitch, moreover, in the
            presence of the peasant witnesses, passed his fingers along the
            collar, the cuffs, and all the seams of the coat and trousers,
            obviously looking for something—money, of course. He didn't even
            hide from Mitya his suspicion that he was capable of sewing money
            up in his clothes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He treats me not as an officer but as a
            thief,”</span> Mitya muttered to himself. They communicated their
            ideas to one another with amazing frankness. The secretary, for
            instance, who was also behind the curtain, fussing about and
            listening, called Nikolay Parfenovitch's attention to the cap,
            which they were also fingering.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You remember Gridyenko, the copying-clerk,”</span>
            observed the secretary. <span class="tei tei-q">“Last summer he
            received the wages of the whole office, and pretended to have
            lost the money when he was drunk. And where was it found? Why, in
            just such pipings in his cap. The hundred-rouble notes were
            screwed up in little rolls and sewed in the piping.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Both the
            lawyers remembered Gridyenko's case perfectly, and so laid aside
            Mitya's cap, and decided that all his clothes must be more
            thoroughly examined later.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Excuse me,”</span> cried Nikolay Parfenovitch,
            suddenly, noticing that the right cuff of Mitya's shirt was
            turned in, and covered with blood, <span class="tei tei-q">“excuse me, what's that, blood?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes,”</span> Mitya jerked out.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That is, what blood? ... and why is the cuff turned
            in?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya told him
            how he had got the sleeve stained with blood looking after
            Grigory, and had turned it inside when he was washing his hands
            at Perhotin's.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You must take off your shirt, too. That's very
            important as material evidence.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya flushed
            red and flew into a rage.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What, am I to stay naked?”</span> he shouted.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't disturb yourself. We will arrange something.
            And meanwhile take off your socks.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You're not joking? Is that really necessary?”</span>
            Mitya's eyes flashed.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page545">[pg 545]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg545" name="Pg545"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We are in no mood for joking,”</span> answered
            Nikolay Parfenovitch sternly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, if I must—”</span> muttered Mitya, and sitting
            down on the bed, he took off his socks. He felt unbearably
            awkward. All were clothed, while he was naked, and strange to
            say, when he was undressed he felt somehow guilty in their
            presence, and was almost ready to believe himself that he was
            inferior to them, and that now they had a perfect right to
            despise him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“When all are undressed, one is somehow not ashamed,
            but when one's the only one undressed and everybody is looking,
            it's degrading,”</span> he kept repeating to himself, again and
            again. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's like a dream, I've sometimes
            dreamed of being in such degrading positions.”</span> It was a
            misery to him to take off his socks. They were very dirty, and so
            were his underclothes, and now every one could see it. And what
            was worse, he disliked his feet. All his life he had thought both
            his big toes hideous. He particularly loathed the coarse, flat,
            crooked nail on the right one, and now they would all see it.
            Feeling intolerably ashamed made him, at once and intentionally,
            rougher. He pulled off his shirt, himself.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Would you like to look anywhere else if you're not
            ashamed to?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, there's no need to, at present.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, am I to stay naked like this?”</span> he added
            savagely.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, that can't be helped for the time.... Kindly
            sit down here for a while. You can wrap yourself in a quilt from
            the bed, and I ... I'll see to all this.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">All the things
            were shown to the witnesses. The report of the search was drawn
            up, and at last Nikolay Parfenovitch went out, and the clothes
            were carried out after him. Ippolit Kirillovitch went out, too.
            Mitya was left alone with the peasants, who stood in silence,
            never taking their eyes off him. Mitya wrapped himself up in the
            quilt. He felt cold. His bare feet stuck out, and he couldn't
            pull the quilt over so as to cover them. Nikolay Parfenovitch
            seemed to be gone a long time, <span class="tei tei-q">“an
            insufferable time.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“He thinks of
            me as a puppy,”</span> thought Mitya, gnashing his teeth.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“That rotten prosecutor has gone, too,
            contemptuous no doubt, it disgusts him to see me
            naked!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya
            imagined, however, that his clothes would be examined and
            returned to him. But what was his indignation when Nikolay
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page546">[pg 546]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg546" name="Pg546"></a> Parfenovitch came
            back with quite different clothes, brought in behind him by a
            peasant.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here are clothes for you,”</span> he observed
            airily, seeming well satisfied with the success of his mission.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Mr. Kalganov has kindly provided these
            for this unusual emergency, as well as a clean shirt. Luckily he
            had them all in his trunk. You can keep your own socks and
            underclothes.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya flew
            into a passion.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I won't have other people's clothes!”</span> he
            shouted menacingly, <span class="tei tei-q">“give me my
            own!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's impossible!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Give me my own. Damn Kalganov and his clothes,
            too!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was a long
            time before they could persuade him. But they succeeded somehow
            in quieting him down. They impressed upon him that his clothes,
            being stained with blood, must be <span class="tei tei-q">“included with the other material evidence,”</span>
            and that they <span class="tei tei-q">“had not even the right to
            let him have them now ... taking into consideration the possible
            outcome of the case.”</span> Mitya at last understood this. He
            subsided into gloomy silence and hurriedly dressed himself. He
            merely observed, as he put them on, that the clothes were much
            better than his old ones, and that he disliked <span class="tei tei-q">“gaining by the change.”</span> The coat was,
            besides, <span class="tei tei-q">“ridiculously tight. Am I to be
            dressed up like a fool ... for your amusement?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They urged
            upon him again that he was exaggerating, that Kalganov was only a
            little taller, so that only the trousers might be a little too
            long. But the coat turned out to be really tight in the
            shoulders.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Damn it all! I can hardly button it,”</span> Mitya
            grumbled. <span class="tei tei-q">“Be so good as to tell Mr.
            Kalganov from me that I didn't ask for his clothes, and it's not
            my doing that they've dressed me up like a clown.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He understands that, and is sorry ... I mean, not
            sorry to lend you his clothes, but sorry about all this
            business,”</span> mumbled Nikolay Parfenovitch.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Confound his sorrow! Well, where now? Am I to go on
            sitting here?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He was asked
            to go back to the <span class="tei tei-q">“other room.”</span>
            Mitya went in, scowling with anger, and trying to avoid looking
            at any one. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page547">[pg
            547]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg547" name="Pg547"></a>
            Dressed in another man's clothes he felt himself disgraced, even
            in the eyes of the peasants, and of Trifon Borissovitch, whose
            face appeared, for some reason, in the doorway, and vanished
            immediately. <span class="tei tei-q">“He's come to look at me
            dressed up,”</span> thought Mitya. He sat down on the same chair
            as before. He had an absurd nightmarish feeling, as though he
            were out of his mind.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, what now? Are you going to flog me? That's all
            that's left for you,”</span> he said, clenching his teeth and
            addressing the prosecutor. He would not turn to Nikolay
            Parfenovitch, as though he disdained to speak to him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He looked too closely at my socks, and turned them
            inside out on purpose to show every one how dirty they were—the
            scoundrel!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, now we must proceed to the examination of
            witnesses,”</span> observed Nikolay Parfenovitch, as though in
            reply to Mitya's question.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes,”</span> said the prosecutor thoughtfully, as
            though reflecting on something.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We've done what we could in your interest, Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch,”</span> Nikolay Parfenovitch went on, <span class="tei tei-q">“but having received from you such an uncompromising
            refusal to explain to us the source from which you obtained the
            money found upon you, we are, at the present moment—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What is the stone in your ring?”</span> Mitya
            interrupted suddenly, as though awakening from a reverie. He
            pointed to one of the three large rings adorning Nikolay
            Parfenovitch's right hand.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ring?”</span> repeated Nikolay Parfenovitch with
            surprise.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, that one ... on your middle finger, with the
            little veins in it, what stone is that?”</span> Mitya persisted,
            like a peevish child.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's a smoky topaz,”</span> said Nikolay
            Parfenovitch, smiling. <span class="tei tei-q">“Would you like to
            look at it? I'll take it off ...”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, don't take it off,”</span> cried Mitya
            furiously, suddenly waking up, and angry with himself.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Don't take it off ... there's no
            need.... Damn it!... Gentlemen, you've sullied my heart! Can you
            suppose that I would conceal it from you, if I had really killed
            my father, that I would shuffle, lie, and hide myself? No, that's
            not like Dmitri Karamazov, that he couldn't do, and if I were
            guilty, I swear I shouldn't have waited for your coming, or for
            the sunrise as I meant at first, but should have killed myself
            before this, without waiting for the dawn! I know that about
            myself now. I <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page548">[pg
            548]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg548" name="Pg548"></a>
            couldn't have learnt so much in twenty years as I've found out in
            this accursed night!... And should I have been like this on this
            night, and at this moment, sitting with you, could I have talked
            like this, could I have moved like this, could I have looked at
            you and at the world like this, if I had really been the murderer
            of my father, when the very thought of having accidentally killed
            Grigory gave me no peace all night—not from fear—oh, not simply
            from fear of your punishment! The disgrace of it! And you expect
            me to be open with such scoffers as you, who see nothing and
            believe in nothing, blind moles and scoffers, and to tell you
            another nasty thing I've done, another disgrace, even if that
            would save me from your accusation! No, better Siberia! The man
            who opened the door to my father and went in at that door, he
            killed him, he robbed him. Who was he? I'm racking my brains and
            can't think who. But I can tell you it was not Dmitri Karamazov,
            and that's all I can tell you, and that's enough, enough, leave
            me alone.... Exile me, punish me, but don't bother me any more.
            I'll say no more. Call your witnesses!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya uttered
            his sudden monologue as though he were determined to be
            absolutely silent for the future. The prosecutor watched him the
            whole time and only when he had ceased speaking, observed, as
            though it were the most ordinary thing, with the most frigid and
            composed air:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, about the open door of which you spoke just now,
            we may as well inform you, by the way, now, of a very interesting
            piece of evidence of the greatest importance both to you and to
            us, that has been given us by Grigory, the old man you wounded.
            On his recovery, he clearly and emphatically stated, in reply to
            our questions, that when, on coming out to the steps, and hearing
            a noise in the garden, he made up his mind to go into it through
            the little gate which stood open, before he noticed you running,
            as you have told us already, in the dark from the open window
            where you saw your father, he, Grigory, glanced to the left, and,
            while noticing the open window, observed at the same time, much
            nearer to him, the door, standing wide open—that door which you
            have stated to have been shut the whole time you were in the
            garden. I will not conceal from you that Grigory himself
            confidently affirms and bears witness that you must have run from
            that door, though, of course, he did not see <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page549">[pg 549]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg549" name="Pg549"></a> you do so with his own eyes,
            since he only noticed you first some distance away in the garden,
            running towards the fence.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya had
            leapt up from his chair half-way through this speech.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nonsense!”</span> he yelled, in a sudden frenzy,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“it's a barefaced lie. He couldn't have
            seen the door open because it was shut. He's lying!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I consider it my duty to repeat that he is firm in
            his statement. He does not waver. He adheres to it. We've
            cross-examined him several times.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Precisely. I have cross-examined him several
            times,”</span> Nikolay Parfenovitch confirmed warmly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's false, false! It's either an attempt to slander
            me, or the hallucination of a madman,”</span> Mitya still
            shouted. <span class="tei tei-q">“He's simply raving, from loss
            of blood, from the wound. He must have fancied it when he came
            to.... He's raving.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, but he noticed the open door, not when he came
            to after his injuries, but before that, as soon as he went into
            the garden from the lodge.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But it's false, it's false! It can't be so! He's
            slandering me from spite.... He couldn't have seen it ... I
            didn't come from the door,”</span> gasped Mitya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The prosecutor
            turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and said to him impressively:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Confront him with it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you recognize this object?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nikolay
            Parfenovitch laid upon the table a large and thick official
            envelope, on which three seals still remained intact. The
            envelope was empty, and slit open at one end. Mitya stared at it
            with open eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It ... it must be that envelope of my father's, the
            envelope that contained the three thousand roubles ... and if
            there's inscribed on it, allow me, <span class="tei tei-q">‘For
            my little chicken’</span> ... yes—three thousand!”</span> he
            shouted, <span class="tei tei-q">“do you see, three thousand, do
            you see?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Of course, we see. But we didn't find the money in
            it. It was empty, and lying on the floor by the bed, behind the
            screen.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">For some
            seconds Mitya stood as though thunderstruck.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen, it's Smerdyakov!”</span> he shouted
            suddenly, at the top of his voice. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's
            he who's murdered him! He's robbed him! No <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page550">[pg 550]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg550" name="Pg550"></a> one else knew where the old
            man hid the envelope. It's Smerdyakov, that's clear,
            now!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But you, too, knew of the envelope and that it was
            under the pillow.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I never knew it. I've never seen it. This is the
            first time I've looked at it. I'd only heard of it from
            Smerdyakov.... He was the only one who knew where the old man
            kept it hidden, I didn't know ...”</span> Mitya was completely
            breathless.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But you told us yourself that the envelope was under
            your deceased father's pillow. You especially stated that it was
            under the pillow, so you must have known it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We've got it written down,”</span> confirmed Nikolay
            Parfenovitch.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Nonsense! It's absurd! I'd no idea it was under the
            pillow. And perhaps it wasn't under the pillow at all.... It was
            just a chance guess that it was under the pillow. What does
            Smerdyakov say? Have you asked him where it was? What does
            Smerdyakov say? that's the chief point.... And I went out of my
            way to tell lies against myself.... I told you without thinking
            that it was under the pillow, and now you— Oh, you know how one
            says the wrong thing, without meaning it. No one knew but
            Smerdyakov, only Smerdyakov, and no one else.... He didn't even
            tell me where it was! But it's his doing, his doing; there's no
            doubt about it, he murdered him, that's as clear as daylight
            now,”</span> Mitya exclaimed more and more frantically, repeating
            himself incoherently, and growing more and more exasperated and
            excited. <span class="tei tei-q">“You must understand that, and
            arrest him at once.... He must have killed him while I was
            running away and while Grigory was unconscious, that's clear
            now.... He gave the signal and father opened to him ... for no
            one but he knew the signal, and without the signal father would
            never have opened the door....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But you're again forgetting the
            circumstance,”</span> the prosecutor observed, still speaking
            with the same restraint, though with a note of triumph,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“that there was no need to give the
            signal if the door already stood open when you were there, while
            you were in the garden....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The door, the door,”</span> muttered Mitya, and he
            stared speechless at the prosecutor. He sank back helpless in his
            chair. All were silent.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page551">[pg 551]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg551" name="Pg551"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, the door!... It's a nightmare! God is against
            me!”</span> he exclaimed, staring before him in complete
            stupefaction.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Come, you see,”</span> the prosecutor went on with
            dignity, <span class="tei tei-q">“and you can judge for yourself,
            Dmitri Fyodorovitch. On the one hand we have the evidence of the
            open door from which you ran out, a fact which overwhelms you and
            us. On the other side your incomprehensible, persistent, and, so
            to speak, obdurate silence with regard to the source from which
            you obtained the money which was so suddenly seen in your hands,
            when only three hours earlier, on your own showing, you pledged
            your pistols for the sake of ten roubles! In view of all these
            facts, judge for yourself. What are we to believe, and what can
            we depend upon? And don't accuse us of being <span class="tei tei-q">‘frigid, cynical, scoffing people,’</span> who are
            incapable of believing in the generous impulses of your heart....
            Try to enter into our position ...”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya was
            indescribably agitated. He turned pale.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Very well!”</span> he exclaimed suddenly.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I will tell you my secret. I'll tell you
            where I got the money!... I'll reveal my shame, that I may not
            have to blame myself or you hereafter.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And believe me, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,”</span> put in
            Nikolay Parfenovitch, in a voice of almost pathetic delight,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“that every sincere and complete
            confession on your part at this moment may, later on, have an
            immense influence in your favor, and may, indeed,
            moreover—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the
            prosecutor gave him a slight shove under the table, and he
            checked himself in time. Mitya, it is true, had not heard
            him.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 3.00em; margin-bottom: 3.00em">
<a id="toc143" name="toc143"></a> <a id="pdf144" name="pdf144"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
