<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-1-2" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-1-2-4" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-top: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter IV. A Lady Of Little
            Faith</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A visitor
            looking on the scene of his conversation with the peasants and
            his blessing them shed silent tears and wiped them away with her
            handkerchief. She was a sentimental society lady of genuinely
            good disposition in many respects. When the elder went up to her
            at last she met him enthusiastically.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, what I have been feeling, looking on at this
            touching scene!...”</span> She could not go on for emotion.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, I understand the people's love for
            you. I love the people myself. I want to love them. And who could
            help loving them, our splendid Russian people, so simple in their
            greatness!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How is your daughter's health? You wanted to talk to
            me again?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, I have been urgently begging for it, I have
            prayed for it! I was ready to fall on my knees and kneel for
            three days at your windows until you let me in. We have come,
            great healer, to express our ardent gratitude. You have healed my
            Lise, healed her completely, merely by praying over her last
            Thursday and laying your hands upon her. We have hastened here to
            kiss those hands, to pour out our feelings and our
            homage.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean by healed? But she is still lying
            down in her chair.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But her night fevers have entirely ceased ever since
            Thursday,”</span> said the lady with nervous haste. <span class="tei tei-q">“And that's not all. Her legs are stronger. This
            morning she got up well; she had slept all night. Look at her
            rosy cheeks, her bright eyes! She used to be always crying, but
            now she laughs and is gay and happy. This morning she insisted on
            my letting her stand up, and she stood up for a whole
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page053">[pg 053]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg053" name="Pg053"></a> minute without any
            support. She wagers that in a fortnight she'll be dancing a
            quadrille. I've called in Doctor Herzenstube. He shrugged his
            shoulders and said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I am amazed; I can
            make nothing of it.’</span> And would you have us not come here
            to disturb you, not fly here to thank you? Lise, thank him—thank
            him!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lise's pretty
            little laughing face became suddenly serious. She rose in her
            chair as far as she could and, looking at the elder, clasped her
            hands before him, but could not restrain herself and broke into
            laughter.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's at him,”</span> she said, pointing to Alyosha,
            with childish vexation at herself for not being able to repress
            her mirth.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">If any one had
            looked at Alyosha standing a step behind the elder, he would have
            caught a quick flush crimsoning his cheeks in an instant. His
            eyes shone and he looked down.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She has a message for you, Alexey Fyodorovitch. How
            are you?”</span> the mother went on, holding out her exquisitely
            gloved hand to Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The elder
            turned round and all at once looked attentively at Alyosha. The
            latter went nearer to Lise and, smiling in a strangely awkward
            way, held out his hand to her too. Lise assumed an important
            air.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Katerina Ivanovna has sent you this through
            me.”</span> She handed him a little note. <span class="tei tei-q">“She particularly begs you to go and see her as soon
            as possible; that you will not fail her, but will be sure to
            come.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She asks me to go and see her? Me? What for?”</span>
            Alyosha muttered in great astonishment. His face at once looked
            anxious. <span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, it's all to do with Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch and—what has happened lately,”</span> the mother
            explained hurriedly. <span class="tei tei-q">“Katerina Ivanovna
            has made up her mind, but she must see you about it.... Why, of
            course, I can't say. But she wants to see you at once. And you
            will go to her, of course. It is a Christian duty.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I have only seen her once,”</span> Alyosha protested
            with the same perplexity.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, she is such a lofty, incomparable creature! If
            only for her suffering.... Think what she has gone through, what
            she is enduring now! Think what awaits her! It's all terrible,
            terrible!”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page054">[pg
            054]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg054" name="Pg054"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Very well, I will come,”</span> Alyosha decided,
            after rapidly scanning the brief, enigmatic note, which consisted
            of an urgent entreaty that he would come, without any sort of
            explanation.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, how sweet and generous that would be of
            you!”</span> cried Lise with sudden animation. <span class="tei tei-q">“I told mamma you'd be sure not to go. I said you
            were saving your soul. How splendid you are! I've always thought
            you were splendid. How glad I am to tell you so!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Lise!”</span> said her mother impressively, though
            she smiled after she had said it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You have quite forgotten us, Alexey
            Fyodorovitch,”</span> she said; <span class="tei tei-q">“you
            never come to see us. Yet Lise has told me twice that she is
            never happy except with you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha raised
            his downcast eyes and again flushed, and again smiled without
            knowing why. But the elder was no longer watching him. He had
            begun talking to a monk who, as mentioned before, had been
            awaiting his entrance by Lise's chair. He was evidently a monk of
            the humblest, that is of the peasant, class, of a narrow outlook,
            but a true believer, and, in his own way, a stubborn one. He
            announced that he had come from the far north, from Obdorsk, from
            Saint Sylvester, and was a member of a poor monastery, consisting
            of only ten monks. The elder gave him his blessing and invited
            him to come to his cell whenever he liked.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How can you presume to do such deeds?”</span> the
            monk asked suddenly, pointing solemnly and significantly at Lise.
            He was referring to her <span class="tei tei-q">“healing.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's too early, of course, to speak of that. Relief
            is not complete cure, and may proceed from different causes. But
            if there has been any healing, it is by no power but God's will.
            It's all from God. Visit me, Father,”</span> he added to the
            monk. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's not often I can see visitors.
            I am ill, and I know that my days are numbered.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no, no! God will not take you from us. You will
            live a long, long time yet,”</span> cried the lady. <span class="tei tei-q">“And in what way are you ill? You look so well, so
            gay and happy.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am extraordinarily better to-day. But I know that
            it's only for a moment. I understand my disease now thoroughly.
            If I seem so happy to you, you could never say anything that
            would please me so much. For men are made for happiness, and any
            one who is <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page055">[pg
            055]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg055" name="Pg055"></a>
            completely happy has a right to say to himself, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I am doing God's will on earth.’</span> All the
            righteous, all the saints, all the holy martyrs were
            happy.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, how you speak! What bold and lofty
            words!”</span> cried the lady. <span class="tei tei-q">“You seem
            to pierce with your words. And yet—happiness, happiness—where is
            it? Who can say of himself that he is happy? Oh, since you have
            been so good as to let us see you once more to-day, let me tell
            you what I could not utter last time, what I dared not say, all I
            am suffering and have been for so long! I am suffering! Forgive
            me! I am suffering!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And in a rush
            of fervent feeling she clasped her hands before him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“From what specially?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I suffer ... from lack of faith.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Lack of faith in God?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no, no! I dare not even think of that. But the
            future life—it is such an enigma! And no one, no one can solve
            it. Listen! You are a healer, you are deeply versed in the human
            soul, and of course I dare not expect you to believe me entirely,
            but I assure you on my word of honor that I am not speaking
            lightly now. The thought of the life beyond the grave distracts
            me to anguish, to terror. And I don't know to whom to appeal, and
            have not dared to all my life. And now I am so bold as to ask
            you. Oh, God! What will you think of me now?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She clasped
            her hands.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't distress yourself about my opinion of
            you,”</span> said the elder. <span class="tei tei-q">“I quite
            believe in the sincerity of your suffering.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, how thankful I am to you! You see, I shut my
            eyes and ask myself if every one has faith, where did it come
            from? And then they do say that it all comes from terror at the
            menacing phenomena of nature, and that none of it's real. And I
            say to myself, <span class="tei tei-q">‘What if I've been
            believing all my life, and when I come to die there's nothing but
            the burdocks growing on my grave?’</span> as I read in some
            author. It's awful! How—how can I get back my faith? But I only
            believed when I was a little child, mechanically, without
            thinking of anything. How, how is one to prove it? I have come
            now to lay my soul before you and to ask you about it. If I let
            this chance slip, no one all my life will answer me. How can I
            prove it? How can I convince myself? Oh, how unhappy I am! I
            stand <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page056">[pg
            056]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg056" name="Pg056"></a>
            and look about me and see that scarcely any one else cares; no
            one troubles his head about it, and I'm the only one who can't
            stand it. It's deadly—deadly!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No doubt. But there's no proving it, though you can
            be convinced of it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“By the experience of active love. Strive to love
            your neighbor actively and indefatigably. In as far as you
            advance in love you will grow surer of the reality of God and of
            the immortality of your soul. If you attain to perfect
            self-forgetfulness in the love of your neighbor, then you will
            believe without doubt, and no doubt can possibly enter your soul.
            This has been tried. This is certain.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“In active love? There's another question—and such a
            question! You see, I so love humanity that—would you believe
            it?—I often dream of forsaking all that I have, leaving Lise, and
            becoming a sister of mercy. I close my eyes and think and dream,
            and at that moment I feel full of strength to overcome all
            obstacles. No wounds, no festering sores could at that moment
            frighten me. I would bind them up and wash them with my own
            hands. I would nurse the afflicted. I would be ready to kiss such
            wounds.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It is much, and well that your mind is full of such
            dreams and not others. Sometime, unawares, you may do a good deed
            in reality.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes. But could I endure such a life for
            long?”</span> the lady went on fervently, almost frantically.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“That's the chief question—that's my most
            agonizing question. I shut my eyes and ask myself, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Would you persevere long on that path? And if the
            patient whose wounds you are washing did not meet you with
            gratitude, but worried you with his whims, without valuing or
            remarking your charitable services, began abusing you and rudely
            commanding you, and complaining to the superior authorities of
            you (which often happens when people are in great suffering)—what
            then? Would you persevere in your love, or not?’</span> And do
            you know, I came with horror to the conclusion that, if anything
            could dissipate my love to humanity, it would be ingratitude. In
            short, I am a hired servant, I expect my payment at once—that is,
            praise, and the repayment of love with love. Otherwise I am
            incapable of loving any one.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page057">[pg 057]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg057" name="Pg057"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She was in a
            very paroxysm of self-castigation, and, concluding, she looked
            with defiant resolution at the elder.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's just the same story as a doctor once told
            me,”</span> observed the elder. <span class="tei tei-q">“He was a
            man getting on in years, and undoubtedly clever. He spoke as
            frankly as you, though in jest, in bitter jest. <span class="tei tei-q">‘I love humanity,’</span> he said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘but I wonder at myself. The more I love humanity in
            general, the less I love man in particular. In my dreams,’</span>
            he said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I have often come to making
            enthusiastic schemes for the service of humanity, and perhaps I
            might actually have faced crucifixion if it had been suddenly
            necessary; and yet I am incapable of living in the same room with
            any one for two days together, as I know by experience. As soon
            as any one is near me, his personality disturbs my
            self-complacency and restricts my freedom. In twenty-four hours I
            begin to hate the best of men: one because he's too long over his
            dinner; another because he has a cold and keeps on blowing his
            nose. I become hostile to people the moment they come close to
            me. But it has always happened that the more I detest men
            individually the more ardent becomes my love for
            humanity.’</span> ”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But what's to be done? What can one do in such a
            case? Must one despair?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No. It is enough that you are distressed at it. Do
            what you can, and it will be reckoned unto you. Much is done
            already in you since you can so deeply and sincerely know
            yourself. If you have been talking to me so sincerely, simply to
            gain approbation for your frankness, as you did from me just now,
            then of course you will not attain to anything in the achievement
            of real love; it will all get no further than dreams, and your
            whole life will slip away like a phantom. In that case you will
            naturally cease to think of the future life too, and will of
            yourself grow calmer after a fashion in the end.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You have crushed me! Only now, as you speak, I
            understand that I was really only seeking your approbation for my
            sincerity when I told you I could not endure ingratitude. You
            have revealed me to myself. You have seen through me and
            explained me to myself!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Are you speaking the truth? Well, now, after such a
            confession, I believe that you are sincere and good at heart. If
            you do not <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page058">[pg
            058]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg058" name="Pg058"></a>
            attain happiness, always remember that you are on the right road,
            and try not to leave it. Above all, avoid falsehood, every kind
            of falsehood, especially falseness to yourself. Watch over your
            own deceitfulness and look into it every hour, every minute.
            Avoid being scornful, both to others and to yourself. What seems
            to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of your
            observing it in yourself. Avoid fear, too, though fear is only
            the consequence of every sort of falsehood. Never be frightened
            at your own faint-heartedness in attaining love. Don't be
            frightened overmuch even at your evil actions. I am sorry I can
            say nothing more consoling to you, for love in action is a harsh
            and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams. Love in dreams
            is greedy for immediate action, rapidly performed and in the
            sight of all. Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal
            does not last long but is soon over, with all looking on and
            applauding as though on the stage. But active love is labor and
            fortitude, and for some people too, perhaps, a complete science.
            But I predict that just when you see with horror that in spite of
            all your efforts you are getting farther from your goal instead
            of nearer to it—at that very moment I predict that you will reach
            it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord who has
            been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you. Forgive me
            for not being able to stay longer with you. They are waiting for
            me. Good-by.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The lady was
            weeping.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Lise, Lise! Bless her—bless her!”</span> she cried,
            starting up suddenly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She does not deserve to be loved. I have seen her
            naughtiness all along,”</span> the elder said jestingly.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Why have you been laughing at
            Alexey?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lise had in
            fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time. She had
            noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her,
            and she found this extremely amusing. She waited intently to
            catch his eye. Alyosha, unable to endure her persistent stare,
            was irresistibly and suddenly drawn to glance at her, and at once
            she smiled triumphantly in his face. Alyosha was even more
            disconcerted and vexed. At last he turned away from her
            altogether and hid behind the elder's back. After a few minutes,
            drawn by the same irresistible force, he turned again to see
            whether he was being looked at or not, and found Lise almost
            hanging out of her chair <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page059">[pg 059]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg059" name="Pg059"></a> to peep sideways at him, eagerly waiting
            for him to look. Catching his eye, she laughed so that the elder
            could not help saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Why do you make
            fun of him like that, naughty girl?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lise suddenly
            and quite unexpectedly blushed. Her eyes flashed and her face
            became quite serious. She began speaking quickly and nervously in
            a warm and resentful voice:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why has he forgotten everything, then? He used to
            carry me about when I was little. We used to play together. He
            used to come to teach me to read, do you know. Two years ago,
            when he went away, he said that he would never forget me, that we
            were friends for ever, for ever, for ever! And now he's afraid of
            me all at once. Am I going to eat him? Why doesn't he want to
            come near me? Why doesn't he talk? Why won't he come and see us?
            It's not that you won't let him. We know that he goes everywhere.
            It's not good manners for me to invite him. He ought to have
            thought of it first, if he hasn't forgotten me. No, now he's
            saving his soul! Why have you put that long gown on him? If he
            runs he'll fall.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And suddenly
            she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible,
            prolonged, nervous, inaudible laughter. The elder listened to her
            with a smile, and blessed her tenderly. As she kissed his hand
            she suddenly pressed it to her eyes and began crying.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't be angry with me. I'm silly and good for
            nothing ... and perhaps Alyosha's right, quite right, in not
            wanting to come and see such a ridiculous girl.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I will certainly send him,”</span> said the
            elder.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em">
<a id="toc25" name="toc25"></a> <a id="pdf26" name="pdf26"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
