<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-4-3" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-4-3-4" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter IV. Fortune Smiles On
            Mitya</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It came quite
            as a surprise even to Alyosha himself. He was not required to
            take the oath, and I remember that both sides addressed him very
            gently and sympathetically. It was evident that his reputation
            for goodness had preceded him. Alyosha gave his evidence modestly
            and with restraint, but his warm sympathy for his unhappy brother
            was unmistakable. In answer to one question, he sketched his
            brother's character as that of a man, violent-tempered perhaps
            and carried away by his passions, but at the same time honorable,
            proud and generous, capable of self-sacrifice, if necessary. He
            admitted, however, that, through his passion for Grushenka and
            his rivalry with his father, his brother had been of late in an
            intolerable position. But he repelled with indignation the
            suggestion that his brother might have committed a murder for the
            sake of gain, though he recognized that the three thousand
            roubles had become almost an obsession with Mitya; that he looked
            upon them as part of the inheritance he had been cheated of by
            his father, and that, indifferent as he was to money as a rule,
            he could not even <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page766">[pg
            766]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg766" name="Pg766"></a>
            speak of that three thousand without fury. As for the rivalry of
            the two <span class="tei tei-q">“ladies,”</span> as the
            prosecutor expressed it—that is, of Grushenka and Katya—he
            answered evasively and was even unwilling to answer one or two
            questions altogether.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Did your brother tell you, anyway, that he intended
            to kill your father?”</span> asked the prosecutor. <span class="tei tei-q">“You can refuse to answer if you think
            necessary,”</span> he added.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He did not tell me so directly,”</span> answered
            Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How so? Did he indirectly?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He spoke to me once of his hatred for our father and
            his fear that at an extreme moment ... at a moment of fury, he
            might perhaps murder him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And you believed him?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am afraid to say that I did. But I never doubted
            that some higher feeling would always save him at the fatal
            moment, as it has indeed saved him, for it was not he killed my
            father,”</span> Alyosha said firmly, in a loud voice that was
            heard throughout the court.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The prosecutor
            started like a war-horse at the sound of a trumpet.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let me assure you that I fully believe in the
            complete sincerity of your conviction and do not explain it by or
            identify it with your affection for your unhappy brother. Your
            peculiar view of the whole tragic episode is known to us already
            from the preliminary investigation. I won't attempt to conceal
            from you that it is highly individual and contradicts all the
            other evidence collected by the prosecution. And so I think it
            essential to press you to tell me what facts have led you to this
            conviction of your brother's innocence and of the guilt of
            another person against whom you gave evidence at the preliminary
            inquiry?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I only answered the questions asked me at the
            preliminary inquiry,”</span> replied Alyosha, slowly and calmly.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I made no accusation against Smerdyakov
            of myself.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yet you gave evidence against him?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I was led to do so by my brother Dmitri's words. I
            was told what took place at his arrest and how he had pointed to
            Smerdyakov before I was examined. I believe absolutely that my
            brother is innocent, and if he didn't commit the murder,
            then—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then Smerdyakov? Why Smerdyakov? And why are you so
            completely persuaded of your brother's
            innocence?”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page767">[pg
            767]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg767" name="Pg767"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I cannot help believing my brother. I know he
            wouldn't lie to me. I saw from his face he wasn't
            lying.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Only from his face? Is that all the proof you
            have?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I have no other proof.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And of Smerdyakov's guilt you have no proof whatever
            but your brother's word and the expression of his
            face?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I have no other proof.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The prosecutor
            dropped the examination at this point. The impression left by
            Alyosha's evidence on the public was most disappointing. There
            had been talk about Smerdyakov before the trial; some one had
            heard something, some one had pointed out something else, it was
            said that Alyosha had gathered together some extraordinary proofs
            of his brother's innocence and Smerdyakov's guilt, and after all
            there was nothing, no evidence except certain moral convictions
            so natural in a brother.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But
            Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination. On his asking Alyosha
            when it was that the prisoner had told him of his hatred for his
            father and that he might kill him, and whether he had heard it,
            for instance, at their last meeting before the catastrophe,
            Alyosha started as he answered, as though only just recollecting
            and understanding something.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I remember one circumstance now which I'd quite
            forgotten myself. It wasn't clear to me at the time, but
            now—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And, obviously
            only now for the first time struck by an idea, he recounted
            eagerly how, at his last interview with Mitya that evening under
            the tree, on the road to the monastery, Mitya had struck himself
            on the breast, <span class="tei tei-q">“the upper part of the
            breast,”</span> and had repeated several times that he had a
            means of regaining his honor, that that means was here, here on
            his breast. <span class="tei tei-q">“I thought, when he struck
            himself on the breast, he meant that it was in his heart,”</span>
            Alyosha continued, <span class="tei tei-q">“that he might find in
            his heart strength to save himself from some awful disgrace which
            was awaiting him and which he did not dare confess even to me. I
            must confess I did think at the time that he was speaking of our
            father, and that the disgrace he was shuddering at was the
            thought of going to our father and doing some violence to him.
            Yet it was just then that he pointed to something on his breast,
            so that I remember the idea struck me at the time that the heart
            is not on that part of the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page768">[pg 768]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg768" name="Pg768"></a> breast, but below, and that he struck
            himself much too high, just below the neck, and kept pointing to
            that place. My idea seemed silly to me at the time, but he was
            perhaps pointing then to that little bag in which he had fifteen
            hundred roubles!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Just so,”</span> Mitya cried from his place.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“That's right, Alyosha, it was the little
            bag I struck with my fist.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Fetyukovitch
            flew to him in hot haste entreating him to keep quiet, and at the
            same instant pounced on Alyosha. Alyosha, carried away himself by
            his recollection, warmly expressed his theory that this disgrace
            was probably just that fifteen hundred roubles on him, which he
            might have returned to Katerina Ivanovna as half of what he owed
            her, but which he had yet determined not to repay her and to use
            for another purpose—namely, to enable him to elope with
            Grushenka, if she consented.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It is so, it must be so,”</span> exclaimed Alyosha,
            in sudden excitement. <span class="tei tei-q">“My brother cried
            several times that half of the disgrace, half of it (he said
            <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">half</span></em> several times) he could
            free himself from at once, but that he was so unhappy in his
            weakness of will that he wouldn't do it ... that he knew
            beforehand he was incapable of doing it!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And you clearly, confidently remember that he struck
            himself just on this part of the breast?”</span> Fetyukovitch
            asked eagerly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Clearly and confidently, for I thought at the time,
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Why does he strike himself up there when
            the heart is lower down?’</span> and the thought seemed stupid to
            me at the time ... I remember its seeming stupid ... it flashed
            through my mind. That's what brought it back to me just now. How
            could I have forgotten it till now? It was that little bag he
            meant when he said he had the means but wouldn't give back that
            fifteen hundred. And when he was arrested at Mokroe he cried
            out—I know, I was told it—that he considered it the most
            disgraceful act of his life that when he had the means of
            repaying Katerina Ivanovna half (half, note!) what he owed her,
            he yet could not bring himself to repay the money and preferred
            to remain a thief in her eyes rather than part with it. And what
            torture, what torture that debt has been to him!”</span> Alyosha
            exclaimed in conclusion.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The
            prosecutor, of course, intervened. He asked Alyosha to describe
            once more how it had all happened, and several times insisted
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page769">[pg 769]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg769" name="Pg769"></a> on the question,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Had the prisoner seemed to point to
            anything? Perhaps he had simply struck himself with his fist on
            the breast?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But it was not with his fist,”</span> cried Alyosha;
            <span class="tei tei-q">“he pointed with his fingers and pointed
            here, very high up.... How could I have so completely forgotten
            it till this moment?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The President
            asked Mitya what he had to say to the last witness's evidence.
            Mitya confirmed it, saying that he had been pointing to the
            fifteen hundred roubles which were on his breast, just below the
            neck, and that that was, of course, the disgrace, <span class="tei tei-q">“A disgrace I cannot deny, the most shameful act of
            my whole life,”</span> cried Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“I
            might have repaid it and didn't repay it. I preferred to remain a
            thief in her eyes rather than give it back. And the most shameful
            part of it was that I knew beforehand I shouldn't give it back!
            You are right, Alyosha! Thanks, Alyosha!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So Alyosha's
            cross-examination ended. What was important and striking about it
            was that one fact at least had been found, and even though this
            were only one tiny bit of evidence, a mere hint at evidence, it
            did go some little way towards proving that the bag had existed
            and had contained fifteen hundred roubles and that the prisoner
            had not been lying at the preliminary inquiry when he alleged at
            Mokroe that those fifteen hundred roubles were <span class="tei tei-q">“his own.”</span> Alyosha was glad. With a flushed
            face he moved away to the seat assigned to him. He kept repeating
            to himself: <span class="tei tei-q">“How was it I forgot? How
            could I have forgotten it? And what made it come back to me
            now?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Katerina
            Ivanovna was called to the witness-box. As she entered something
            extraordinary happened in the court. The ladies clutched their
            lorgnettes and opera-glasses. There was a stir among the men:
            some stood up to get a better view. Everybody alleged afterwards
            that Mitya had turned <span class="tei tei-q">“white as a
            sheet”</span> on her entrance. All in black, she advanced
            modestly, almost timidly. It was impossible to tell from her face
            that she was agitated; but there was a resolute gleam in her dark
            and gloomy eyes. I may remark that many people mentioned that she
            looked particularly handsome at that moment. She spoke softly but
            clearly, so that she was heard all over the court. She expressed
            herself with composure, or at least tried to appear composed. The
            President began his examination discreetly <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page770">[pg 770]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg770" name="Pg770"></a> and very respectfully, as
            though afraid to touch on <span class="tei tei-q">“certain
            chords,”</span> and showing consideration for her great
            unhappiness. But in answer to one of the first questions Katerina
            Ivanovna replied firmly that she had been formerly betrothed to
            the prisoner, <span class="tei tei-q">“until he left me of his
            own accord...”</span> she added quietly. When they asked her
            about the three thousand she had entrusted to Mitya to post to
            her relations, she said firmly, <span class="tei tei-q">“I didn't
            give him the money simply to send it off. I felt at the time that
            he was in great need of money.... I gave him the three thousand
            on the understanding that he should post it within the month if
            he cared to. There was no need for him to worry himself about
            that debt afterwards.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I will not
            repeat all the questions asked her and all her answers in detail.
            I will only give the substance of her evidence.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I was firmly convinced that he would send off that
            sum as soon as he got money from his father,”</span> she went on.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“I have never doubted his
            disinterestedness and his honesty ... his scrupulous honesty ...
            in money matters. He felt quite certain that he would receive the
            money from his father, and spoke to me several times about it. I
            knew he had a feud with his father and have always believed that
            he had been unfairly treated by his father. I don't remember any
            threat uttered by him against his father. He certainly never
            uttered any such threat before me. If he had come to me at that
            time, I should have at once relieved his anxiety about that
            unlucky three thousand roubles, but he had given up coming to see
            me ... and I myself was put in such a position ... that I could
            not invite him.... And I had no right, indeed, to be exacting as
            to that money,”</span> she added suddenly, and there was a ring
            of resolution in her voice. <span class="tei tei-q">“I was once
            indebted to him for assistance in money for more than three
            thousand, and I took it, although I could not at that time
            foresee that I should ever be in a position to repay my
            debt.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was a
            note of defiance in her voice. It was then Fetyukovitch began his
            cross-examination.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Did that take place not here, but at the beginning
            of your acquaintance?”</span> Fetyukovitch suggested cautiously,
            feeling his way, instantly scenting something favorable. I must
            mention in parenthesis that, though Fetyukovitch had been brought
            from Petersburg partly at the instance of Katerina Ivanovna
            herself, he knew nothing <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page771">[pg 771]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg771" name="Pg771"></a> about the episode of the four thousand
            roubles given her by Mitya, and of her <span class="tei tei-q">“bowing to the ground to him.”</span> She concealed
            this from him and said nothing about it, and that was strange. It
            may be pretty certainly assumed that she herself did not know
            till the very last minute whether she would speak of that episode
            in the court, and waited for the inspiration of the moment.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">No, I can
            never forget those moments. She began telling her story. She told
            everything, the whole episode that Mitya had told Alyosha, and
            her bowing to the ground, and her reason. She told about her
            father and her going to Mitya, and did not in one word, in a
            single hint, suggest that Mitya had himself, through her sister,
            proposed they should <span class="tei tei-q">“send him Katerina
            Ivanovna”</span> to fetch the money. She generously concealed
            that and was not ashamed to make it appear as though she had of
            her own impulse run to the young officer, relying on something
            ... to beg him for the money. It was something tremendous! I
            turned cold and trembled as I listened. The court was hushed,
            trying to catch each word. It was something unexampled. Even from
            such a self-willed and contemptuously proud girl as she was, such
            an extremely frank avowal, such sacrifice, such self-immolation,
            seemed incredible. And for what, for whom? To save the man who
            had deceived and insulted her and to help, in however small a
            degree, in saving him, by creating a strong impression in his
            favor. And, indeed, the figure of the young officer who, with a
            respectful bow to the innocent girl, handed her his last four
            thousand roubles—all he had in the world—was thrown into a very
            sympathetic and attractive light, but ... I had a painful
            misgiving at heart! I felt that calumny might come of it later
            (and it did, in fact, it did). It was repeated all over the town
            afterwards with spiteful laughter that the story was perhaps not
            quite complete—that is, in the statement that the officer had let
            the young lady depart <span class="tei tei-q">“with nothing but a
            respectful bow.”</span> It was hinted that something was here
            omitted.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And even if nothing had been omitted, if this were
            the whole story,”</span> the most highly respected of our ladies
            maintained, <span class="tei tei-q">“even then it's very doubtful
            whether it was creditable for a young girl to behave in that way,
            even for the sake of saving her father.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And can
            Katerina Ivanovna, with her intelligence, her morbid
            sensitiveness, have failed to understand that people would talk
            like <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page772">[pg
            772]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg772" name="Pg772"></a>
            that? She must have understood it, yet she made up her mind to
            tell everything. Of course, all these nasty little suspicions as
            to the truth of her story only arose afterwards and at the first
            moment all were deeply impressed by it. As for the judges and the
            lawyers, they listened in reverent, almost shame-faced silence to
            Katerina Ivanovna. The prosecutor did not venture upon even one
            question on the subject. Fetyukovitch made a low bow to her. Oh,
            he was almost triumphant! Much ground had been gained. For a man
            to give his last four thousand on a generous impulse and then for
            the same man to murder his father for the sake of robbing him of
            three thousand—the idea seemed too incongruous. Fetyukovitch felt
            that now the charge of theft, at least, was as good as disproved.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“The case”</span> was thrown into quite a
            different light. There was a wave of sympathy for Mitya. As for
            him.... I was told that once or twice, while Katerina Ivanovna
            was giving her evidence, he jumped up from his seat, sank back
            again, and hid his face in his hands. But when she had finished,
            he suddenly cried in a sobbing voice:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Katya, why have you ruined me?”</span> and his sobs
            were audible all over the court. But he instantly restrained
            himself, and cried again:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Now I am condemned!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then he sat
            rigid in his place, with his teeth clenched and his arms across
            his chest. Katerina Ivanovna remained in the court and sat down
            in her place. She was pale and sat with her eyes cast down. Those
            who were sitting near her declared that for a long time she
            shivered all over as though in a fever. Grushenka was called.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I am
            approaching the sudden catastrophe which was perhaps the final
            cause of Mitya's ruin. For I am convinced, so is every one—all
            the lawyers said the same afterwards—that if the episode had not
            occurred, the prisoner would at least have been recommended to
            mercy. But of that later. A few words first about Grushenka.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She, too, was
            dressed entirely in black, with her magnificent black shawl on
            her shoulders. She walked to the witness-box with her smooth,
            noiseless tread, with the slightly swaying gait common in women
            of full figure. She looked steadily at the President, turning her
            eyes neither to the right nor to the left. To my thinking she
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page773">[pg 773]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg773" name="Pg773"></a> looked very
            handsome at that moment, and not at all pale, as the ladies
            alleged afterwards. They declared, too, that she had a
            concentrated and spiteful expression. I believe that she was
            simply irritated and painfully conscious of the contemptuous and
            inquisitive eyes of our scandal-loving public. She was proud and
            could not stand contempt. She was one of those people who flare
            up, angry and eager to retaliate, at the mere suggestion of
            contempt. There was an element of timidity, too, of course, and
            inward shame at her own timidity, so it was not strange that her
            tone kept changing. At one moment it was angry, contemptuous and
            rough, and at another there was a sincere note of
            self-condemnation. Sometimes she spoke as though she were taking
            a desperate plunge; as though she felt, <span class="tei tei-q">“I don't care what happens, I'll say it....”</span>
            Apropos of her acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch, she remarked
            curtly, <span class="tei tei-q">“That's all nonsense, and was it
            my fault that he would pester me?”</span> But a minute later she
            added, <span class="tei tei-q">“It was all my fault. I was
            laughing at them both—at the old man and at him, too—and I
            brought both of them to this. It was all on account of me it
            happened.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Samsonov's
            name came up somehow. <span class="tei tei-q">“That's nobody's
            business,”</span> she snapped at once, with a sort of insolent
            defiance. <span class="tei tei-q">“He was my benefactor; he took
            me when I hadn't a shoe to my foot, when my family had turned me
            out.”</span> The President reminded her, though very politely,
            that she must answer the questions directly, without going off
            into irrelevant details. Grushenka crimsoned and her eyes
            flashed.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The envelope
            with the notes in it she had not seen, but had only heard from
            <span class="tei tei-q">“that wicked wretch”</span> that Fyodor
            Pavlovitch had an envelope with notes for three thousand in it.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“But that was all foolishness. I was only
            laughing. I wouldn't have gone to him for anything.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To whom are you referring as <span class="tei tei-q">‘that wicked wretch’</span>?”</span> inquired the
            prosecutor.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The lackey, Smerdyakov, who murdered his master and
            hanged himself last night.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She was, of
            course, at once asked what ground she had for such a definite
            accusation; but it appeared that she, too, had no grounds for
            it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Dmitri Fyodorovitch told me so himself; you can
            believe him. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page774">[pg
            774]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg774" name="Pg774"></a>
            The woman who came between us has ruined him; she is the cause of
            it all, let me tell you,”</span> Grushenka added. She seemed to
            be quivering with hatred, and there was a vindictive note in her
            voice.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She was again
            asked to whom she was referring.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The young lady, Katerina Ivanovna there. She sent
            for me, offered me chocolate, tried to fascinate me. There's not
            much true shame about her, I can tell you that....”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this point
            the President checked her sternly, begging her to moderate her
            language. But the jealous woman's heart was burning, and she did
            not care what she did.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“When the prisoner was arrested at Mokroe,”</span>
            the prosecutor asked, <span class="tei tei-q">“every one saw and
            heard you run out of the next room and cry out: <span class="tei tei-q">‘It's all my fault. We'll go to Siberia
            together!’</span> So you already believed him to have murdered
            his father?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't remember what I felt at the time,”</span>
            answered Grushenka. <span class="tei tei-q">“Every one was crying
            out that he had killed his father, and I felt that it was my
            fault, that it was on my account he had murdered him. But when he
            said he wasn't guilty, I believed him at once, and I believe him
            now and always shall believe him. He is not the man to tell a
            lie.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Fetyukovitch
            began his cross-examination. I remember that among other things
            he asked about Rakitin and the twenty-five roubles <span class="tei tei-q">“you paid him for bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch
            Karamazov to see you.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There was nothing strange about his taking the
            money,”</span> sneered Grushenka, with angry contempt.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“He was always coming to me for money: he
            used to get thirty roubles a month at least out of me, chiefly
            for luxuries: he had enough to keep him without my
            help.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What led you to be so liberal to Mr.
            Rakitin?”</span> Fetyukovitch asked, in spite of an uneasy
            movement on the part of the President.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, he is my cousin. His mother was my mother's
            sister. But he's always besought me not to tell any one here of
            it, he is so dreadfully ashamed of me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This fact was
            a complete surprise to every one; no one in the town nor in the
            monastery, not even Mitya, knew of it. I was told that Rakitin
            turned purple with shame where he sat. Grushenka had somehow
            heard before she came into the court that he had given evidence
            against Mitya, and so she was angry. The whole <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page775">[pg 775]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg775" name="Pg775"></a> effect on the public, of
            Rakitin's speech, of his noble sentiments, of his attacks upon
            serfdom and the political disorder of Russia, was this time
            finally ruined. Fetyukovitch was satisfied: it was another
            godsend. Grushenka's cross-examination did not last long and, of
            course, there could be nothing particularly new in her evidence.
            She left a very disagreeable impression on the public; hundreds
            of contemptuous eyes were fixed upon her, as she finished giving
            her evidence and sat down again in the court, at a good distance
            from Katerina Ivanovna. Mitya was silent throughout her evidence.
            He sat as though turned to stone, with his eyes fixed on the
            ground.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Ivan was
            called to give evidence.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 3.00em; margin-bottom: 3.00em">
<a id="toc199" name="toc199"></a> <a id="pdf200" name="pdf200"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
