<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-4-3" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-4-3-14" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.40em; margin-top: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter XIV. The Peasants Stand
            Firm</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This was how
            Fetyukovitch concluded his speech, and the enthusiasm of the
            audience burst like an irresistible storm. It was out of the
            question to stop it: the women wept, many of the men wept too,
            even two important personages shed tears. The President
            submitted, and even postponed ringing his bell. The suppression
            of such an enthusiasm would be the suppression of something
            sacred, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page848">[pg
            848]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg848" name="Pg848"></a>
            as the ladies cried afterwards. The orator himself was genuinely
            touched.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And it was at
            this moment that Ippolit Kirillovitch got up to make certain
            objections. People looked at him with hatred. <span class="tei tei-q">“What? What's the meaning of it? He positively dares
            to make objections,”</span> the ladies babbled. But if the whole
            world of ladies, including his wife, had protested he could not
            have been stopped at that moment. He was pale, he was shaking
            with emotion, his first phrases were even unintelligible, he
            gasped for breath, could hardly speak clearly, lost the thread.
            But he soon recovered himself. Of this new speech of his I will
            quote only a few sentences.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“... I am reproached with having woven a romance. But
            what is this defense if not one romance on the top of another?
            All that was lacking was poetry. Fyodor Pavlovitch, while waiting
            for his mistress, tears open the envelope and throws it on the
            floor. We are even told what he said while engaged in this
            strange act. Is not this a flight of fancy? And what proof have
            we that he had taken out the money? Who heard what he said? The
            weak-minded idiot, Smerdyakov, transformed into a Byronic hero,
            avenging society for his illegitimate birth—isn't this a romance
            in the Byronic style? And the son who breaks into his father's
            house and murders him without murdering him is not even a
            romance—this is a sphinx setting us a riddle which he cannot
            solve himself. If he murdered him, he murdered him, and what's
            the meaning of his murdering him without having murdered him—who
            can make head or tail of this?</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then we are admonished that our tribune is a tribune
            of true and sound ideas and from this tribune of <span class="tei tei-q">‘sound ideas’</span> is heard a solemn declaration
            that to call the murder of a father <span class="tei tei-q">‘parricide’</span> is nothing but a prejudice! But if
            parricide is a prejudice, and if every child is to ask his father
            why he is to love him, what will become of us? What will become
            of the foundations of society? What will become of the family?
            Parricide, it appears, is only a bogy of Moscow merchants' wives.
            The most precious, the most sacred guarantees for the destiny and
            future of Russian justice are presented to us in a perverted and
            frivolous form, simply to attain an object—to obtain the
            justification of something which cannot be justified.
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Oh, crush him by mercy,’</span> cries
            the counsel for the defense; but that's all <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page849">[pg 849]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg849" name="Pg849"></a> the criminal wants, and
            to-morrow it will be seen how much he is crushed. And is not the
            counsel for the defense too modest in asking only for the
            acquittal of the prisoner? Why not found a charity in the honor
            of the parricide to commemorate his exploit among future
            generations? Religion and the Gospel are corrected—that's all
            mysticism, we are told, and ours is the only true Christianity
            which has been subjected to the analysis of reason and common
            sense. And so they set up before us a false semblance of Christ!
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘What measure ye mete so it shall be
            meted unto you again,’</span> cried the counsel for the defense,
            and instantly deduces that Christ teaches us to measure as it is
            measured to us—and this from the tribune of truth and sound
            sense! We peep into the Gospel only on the eve of making
            speeches, in order to dazzle the audience by our acquaintance
            with what is, anyway, a rather original composition, which may be
            of use to produce a certain effect—all to serve the purpose! But
            what Christ commands us is something very different: He bids us
            beware of doing this, because the wicked world does this, but we
            ought to forgive and to turn the other cheek, and not to measure
            to our persecutors as they measure to us. This is what our God
            has taught us and not that to forbid children to murder their
            fathers is a prejudice. And we will not from the tribune of truth
            and good sense correct the Gospel of our Lord, Whom the counsel
            for the defense deigns to call only <span class="tei tei-q">‘the
            crucified lover of humanity,’</span> in opposition to all
            orthodox Russia, which calls to Him, <span class="tei tei-q">‘For
            Thou art our God!’</span> ”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At this the
            President intervened and checked the over-zealous speaker,
            begging him not to exaggerate, not to overstep the bounds, and so
            on, as presidents always do in such cases. The audience, too, was
            uneasy. The public was restless: there were even exclamations of
            indignation. Fetyukovitch did not so much as reply; he only
            mounted the tribune to lay his hand on his heart and, with an
            offended voice, utter a few words full of dignity. He only
            touched again, lightly and ironically, on <span class="tei tei-q">“romancing”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“psychology,”</span> and in an appropriate place
            quoted, <span class="tei tei-q">“Jupiter, you are angry,
            therefore you are wrong,”</span> which provoked a burst of
            approving laughter in the audience, for Ippolit Kirillovitch was
            by no means like Jupiter. Then, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Ã 
            propos</span></span> of the accusation that he was teaching the
            young generation to murder their fathers, Fetyukovitch observed,
            with <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page850">[pg
            850]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg850" name="Pg850"></a>
            great dignity, that he would not even answer. As for the
            prosecutor's charge of uttering unorthodox opinions, Fetyukovitch
            hinted that it was a personal insinuation and that he had
            expected in this court to be secure from accusations <span class="tei tei-q">“damaging to my reputation as a citizen and a loyal
            subject.”</span> But at these words the President pulled him up,
            too, and Fetyukovitch concluded his speech with a bow, amid a hum
            of approbation in the court. And Ippolit Kirillovitch was, in the
            opinion of our ladies, <span class="tei tei-q">“crushed for
            good.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Then the
            prisoner was allowed to speak. Mitya stood up, but said very
            little. He was fearfully exhausted, physically and mentally. The
            look of strength and independence with which he had entered in
            the morning had almost disappeared. He seemed as though he had
            passed through an experience that day, which had taught him for
            the rest of his life something very important he had not
            understood till then. His voice was weak, he did not shout as
            before. In his words there was a new note of humility, defeat and
            submission.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What am I to say, gentlemen of the jury? The hour of
            judgment has come for me, I feel the hand of God upon me! The end
            has come to an erring man! But, before God, I repeat to you, I am
            innocent of my father's blood! For the last time I repeat, it
            wasn't I killed him! I was erring, but I loved what is good.
            Every instant I strove to reform, but I lived like a wild beast.
            I thank the prosecutor, he told me many things about myself that
            I did not know; but it's not true that I killed my father, the
            prosecutor is mistaken. I thank my counsel, too. I cried
            listening to him; but it's not true that I killed my father, and
            he needn't have supposed it. And don't believe the doctors. I am
            perfectly sane, only my heart is heavy. If you spare me, if you
            let me go, I will pray for you. I will be a better man. I give
            you my word before God I will! And if you will condemn me, I'll
            break my sword over my head myself and kiss the pieces. But spare
            me, do not rob me of my God! I know myself, I shall rebel! My
            heart is heavy, gentlemen ... spare me!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He almost fell
            back in his place: his voice broke: he could hardly articulate
            the last phrase. Then the judges proceeded to put the questions
            and began to ask both sides to formulate their
            conclusions.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page851">[pg
            851]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg851" name="Pg851"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But I will not
            describe the details. At last the jury rose to retire for
            consultation. The President was very tired, and so his last
            charge to the jury was rather feeble. <span class="tei tei-q">“Be
            impartial, don't be influenced by the eloquence of the defense,
            but yet weigh the arguments. Remember that there is a great
            responsibility laid upon you,”</span> and so on and so on.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The jury
            withdrew and the court adjourned. People could get up, move
            about, exchange their accumulated impressions, refresh themselves
            at the buffet. It was very late, almost one o'clock in the night,
            but nobody went away: the strain was so great that no one could
            think of repose. All waited with sinking hearts; though that is,
            perhaps, too much to say, for the ladies were only in a state of
            hysterical impatience and their hearts were untroubled. An
            acquittal, they thought, was inevitable. They all prepared
            themselves for a dramatic moment of general enthusiasm. I must
            own there were many among the men, too, who were convinced that
            an acquittal was inevitable. Some were pleased, others frowned,
            while some were simply dejected, not wanting him to be acquitted.
            Fetyukovitch himself was confident of his success. He was
            surrounded by people congratulating him and fawning upon him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There are,”</span> he said to one group, as I was
            told afterwards, <span class="tei tei-q">“there are invisible
            threads binding the counsel for the defense with the jury. One
            feels during one's speech if they are being formed. I was aware
            of them. They exist. Our cause is won. Set your mind at
            rest.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What will our peasants say now?”</span> said one
            stout, cross-looking, pock-marked gentleman, a landowner of the
            neighborhood, approaching a group of gentlemen engaged in
            conversation.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But they are not all peasants. There are four
            government clerks among them.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, there are clerks,”</span> said a member of the
            district council, joining the group.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And do you know that Nazaryev, the merchant with the
            medal, a juryman?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What of him?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He is a man with brains.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But he never speaks.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He is no great talker, but so much the better.
            There's no need <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page852">[pg
            852]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg852" name="Pg852"></a>
            for the Petersburg man to teach him: he could teach all
            Petersburg himself. He's the father of twelve children. Think of
            that!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Upon my word, you don't suppose they won't acquit
            him?”</span> one of our young officials exclaimed in another
            group.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They'll acquit him for certain,”</span> said a
            resolute voice.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It would be shameful, disgraceful, not to acquit
            him!”</span> cried the official. <span class="tei tei-q">“Suppose
            he did murder him—there are fathers and fathers! And, besides, he
            was in such a frenzy.... He really may have done nothing but
            swing the pestle in the air, and so knocked the old man down. But
            it was a pity they dragged the valet in. That was simply an
            absurd theory! If I'd been in Fetyukovitch's place, I should
            simply have said straight out: <span class="tei tei-q">‘He
            murdered him; but he is not guilty, hang it
            all!’</span> ”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's what he did, only without saying,
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Hang it all!’</span> ”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, Mihail Semyonovitch, he almost said that,
            too,”</span> put in a third voice.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why, gentlemen, in Lent an actress was acquitted in
            our town who had cut the throat of her lover's lawful
            wife.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, but she did not finish cutting it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That makes no difference. She began cutting
            it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What did you think of what he said about children?
            Splendid, wasn't it?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Splendid!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And about mysticism, too!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, drop mysticism, do!”</span> cried some one else;
            <span class="tei tei-q">“think of Ippolit and his fate from this
            day forth. His wife will scratch his eyes out to-morrow for
            Mitya's sake.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Is she here?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What an idea! If she'd been here she'd have
            scratched them out in court. She is at home with toothache. He he
            he!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He he he!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In a third
            group:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I dare say they will acquit Mitenka, after
            all.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I should not be surprised if he turns the
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Metropolis’</span> upside down
            to-morrow. He will be drinking for ten days!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, the devil!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The devil's bound to have a hand in it. Where should
            he be if not here?”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page853">[pg 853]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg853" name="Pg853"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, gentlemen, I admit it was eloquent. But still
            it's not the thing to break your father's head with a pestle! Or
            what are we coming to?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The chariot! Do you remember the
            chariot?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes; he turned a cart into a chariot!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And to-morrow he will turn a chariot into a cart,
            just to suit his purpose.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What cunning chaps there are nowadays! Is there any
            justice to be had in Russia?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But the bell
            rang. The jury deliberated for exactly an hour, neither more nor
            less. A profound silence reigned in the court as soon as the
            public had taken their seats. I remember how the jurymen walked
            into the court. At last! I won't repeat the questions in order,
            and, indeed, I have forgotten them. I remember only the answer to
            the President's first and chief question: <span class="tei tei-q">“Did the prisoner commit the murder for the sake of
            robbery and with premeditation?”</span> (I don't remember the
            exact words.) There was a complete hush. The foreman of the jury,
            the youngest of the clerks, pronounced, in a clear, loud voice,
            amidst the deathlike stillness of the court:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, guilty!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And the same
            answer was repeated to every question: <span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, guilty!”</span> and without the slightest
            extenuating comment. This no one had expected; almost every one
            had reckoned upon a recommendation to mercy, at least. The
            deathlike silence in the court was not broken—all seemed
            petrified: those who desired his conviction as well as those who
            had been eager for his acquittal. But that was only for the first
            instant, and it was followed by a fearful hubbub. Many of the men
            in the audience were pleased. Some were rubbing their hands with
            no attempt to conceal their joy. Those who disagreed with the
            verdict seemed crushed, shrugged their shoulders, whispered, but
            still seemed unable to realize this. But how shall I describe the
            state the ladies were in? I thought they would create a riot. At
            first they could scarcely believe their ears. Then suddenly the
            whole court rang with exclamations: <span class="tei tei-q">“What's the meaning of it? What next?”</span> They
            leapt up from their places. They seemed to fancy that it might be
            at once reconsidered and reversed. At that instant Mitya suddenly
            stood up <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page854">[pg
            854]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg854" name="Pg854"></a>
            and cried in a heartrending voice, stretching his hands out
            before him:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am
            not guilty of my father's blood! Katya, I forgive you! Brothers,
            friends, have pity on the other woman!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He could not
            go on, and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heard all
            over the court in a strange, unnatural voice unlike his own. From
            the farthest corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing
            shriek—it was Grushenka. She had succeeded in begging admittance
            to the court again before the beginning of the lawyers' speeches.
            Mitya was taken away. The passing of the sentence was deferred
            till next day. The whole court was in a hubbub but I did not wait
            to hear. I only remember a few exclamations I heard on the steps
            as I went out.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He'll have a twenty years' trip to the
            mines!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Not less.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, our peasants have stood firm.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And have done for our Mitya.”</span></p>
</div>
</div>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page855">[pg 855]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg855" name="Pg855"></a>
<hr class="page"/>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 5.00em; margin-bottom: 5.00em">
<a id="toc219" name="toc219"></a> <a id="pdf220" name="pdf220"></a>
<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 3.46em; margin-bottom: 3.46em; text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 173%">Epilogue</span></h1>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 4.00em; margin-bottom: 4.00em">
<a id="toc221" name="toc221"></a> <a id="pdf222" name="pdf222"></a>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-bottom: 2.88em; text-align: left; margin-top: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter I. Plans For Mitya's
          Escape</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Very early, at
          nine o'clock in the morning, five days after the trial, Alyosha
          went to Katerina Ivanovna's to talk over a matter of great
          importance to both of them, and to give her a message. She sat and
          talked to him in the very room in which she had once received
          Grushenka. In the next room Ivan Fyodorovitch lay unconscious in a
          high fever. Katerina Ivanovna had immediately after the scene at
          the trial ordered the sick and unconscious man to be carried to her
          house, disregarding the inevitable gossip and general disapproval
          of the public. One of the two relations who lived with her had
          departed to Moscow immediately after the scene in court, the other
          remained. But if both had gone away, Katerina Ivanovna would have
          adhered to her resolution, and would have gone on nursing the sick
          man and sitting by him day and night. Varvinsky and Herzenstube
          were attending him. The famous doctor had gone back to Moscow,
          refusing to give an opinion as to the probable end of the illness.
          Though the doctors encouraged Katerina Ivanovna and Alyosha, it was
          evident that they could not yet give them positive hopes of
          recovery.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha came to
          see his sick brother twice a day. But this time he had specially
          urgent business, and he foresaw how difficult it would be to
          approach the subject, yet he was in great haste. He had another
          engagement that could not be put off for that same morning, and
          there was need of haste.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They had been
          talking for a quarter of an hour. Katerina Ivanovna was pale and
          terribly fatigued, yet at the same time in a state of hysterical
          excitement. She had a presentiment of the reason why Alyosha had
          come to her.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page856">[pg
          856]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg856" name="Pg856"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't worry about his decision,”</span> she said, with
          confident emphasis to Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“One way or
          another he is bound to come to it. He must escape. That unhappy
          man, that hero of honor and principle—not he, not Dmitri
          Fyodorovitch, but the man lying the other side of that door, who
          has sacrificed himself for his brother,”</span> Katya added, with
          flashing eyes—<span class="tei tei-q">“told me the whole plan of
          escape long ago. You know he has already entered into
          negotiations.... I've told you something already.... You see, it
          will probably come off at the third <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">étape</span></span> from here, when the party
          of prisoners is being taken to Siberia. Oh, it's a long way off
          yet. Ivan Fyodorovitch has already visited the superintendent of
          the third <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">étape</span></span>. But we don't know yet who
          will be in charge of the party, and it's impossible to find that
          out so long beforehand. To-morrow perhaps I will show you in detail
          the whole plan which Ivan Fyodorovitch left me on the eve of the
          trial in case of need.... That was when—do you remember?—you found
          us quarreling. He had just gone down-stairs, but seeing you I made
          him come back; do you remember? Do you know what we were quarreling
          about then?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I don't,”</span> said Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Of course he did not tell you. It was about that plan
          of escape. He had told me the main idea three days before, and we
          began quarreling about it at once and quarreled for three days. We
          quarreled because, when he told me that if Dmitri Fyodorovitch were
          convicted he would escape abroad with that creature, I felt furious
          at once—I can't tell you why, I don't know myself why.... Oh, of
          course, I was furious then about that creature, and that she, too,
          should go abroad with Dmitri!”</span> Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed
          suddenly, her lips quivering with anger. <span class="tei tei-q">“As soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch saw that I was furious
          about that woman, he instantly imagined I was jealous of Dmitri and
          that I still loved Dmitri. That is how our first quarrel began. I
          would not give an explanation, I could not ask forgiveness. I could
          not bear to think that such a man could suspect me of still loving
          that ... and when I myself had told him long before that I did not
          love Dmitri, that I loved no one but him! It was only resentment
          against that creature that made me angry with him. Three days
          later, on the evening you came, he brought me a sealed envelope,
          which I was to open at once, if anything happened to him. Oh, he
          foresaw his illness! He told me <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page857">[pg 857]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg857" name="Pg857"></a> that the envelope contained the details of
          the escape, and that if he died or was taken dangerously ill, I was
          to save Mitya alone. Then he left me money, nearly ten
          thousand—those notes to which the prosecutor referred in his
          speech, having learnt from some one that he had sent them to be
          changed. I was tremendously impressed to find that Ivan
          Fyodorovitch had not given up his idea of saving his brother, and
          was confiding this plan of escape to me, though he was still
          jealous of me and still convinced that I loved Mitya. Oh, that was
          a sacrifice! No, you cannot understand the greatness of such
          self-sacrifice, Alexey Fyodorovitch. I wanted to fall at his feet
          in reverence, but I thought at once that he would take it only for
          my joy at the thought of Mitya's being saved (and he certainly
          would have imagined that!), and I was so exasperated at the mere
          possibility of such an unjust thought on his part that I lost my
          temper again, and instead of kissing his feet, flew into a fury
          again! Oh, I am unhappy! It's my character, my awful, unhappy
          character! Oh, you will see, I shall end by driving him, too, to
          abandon me for another with whom he can get on better, like Dmitri.
          But ... no, I could not bear it, I should kill myself. And when you
          came in then, and when I called to you and told him to come back, I
          was so enraged by the look of contempt and hatred he turned on me
          that—do you remember?—I cried out to you that it was he, he alone
          who had persuaded me that his brother Dmitri was a murderer! I said
          that malicious thing on purpose to wound him again. He had never,
          never persuaded me that his brother was a murderer. On the
          contrary, it was I who persuaded him! Oh, my vile temper was the
          cause of everything! I paved the way to that hideous scene at the
          trial. He wanted to show me that he was an honorable man, and that,
          even if I loved his brother, he would not ruin him for revenge or
          jealousy. So he came to the court ... I am the cause of it all, I
          alone am to blame!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Katya never had
          made such confessions to Alyosha before, and he felt that she was
          now at that stage of unbearable suffering when even the proudest
          heart painfully crushes its pride and falls vanquished by grief.
          Oh, Alyosha knew another terrible reason of her present misery,
          though she had carefully concealed it from him during those days
          since the trial; but it would have been for some reason too painful
          to him if she had been brought so low as to speak <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page858">[pg 858]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg858" name="Pg858"></a> to him now about that. She was
          suffering for her <span class="tei tei-q">“treachery”</span> at the
          trial, and Alyosha felt that her conscience was impelling her to
          confess it to him, to him, Alyosha, with tears and cries and
          hysterical writhings on the floor. But he dreaded that moment and
          longed to spare her. It made the commission on which he had come
          even more difficult. He spoke of Mitya again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's all right, it's all right, don't be anxious about
          him!”</span> she began again, sharply and stubbornly. <span class="tei tei-q">“All that is only momentary, I know him, I know his
          heart only too well. You may be sure he will consent to escape.
          It's not as though it would be immediately; he will have time to
          make up his mind to it. Ivan Fyodorovitch will be well by that time
          and will manage it all himself, so that I shall have nothing to do
          with it. Don't be anxious; he will consent to run away. He has
          agreed already: do you suppose he would give up that creature? And
          they won't let her go to him, so he is bound to escape. It's you
          he's most afraid of, he is afraid you won't approve of his escape
          on moral grounds. But you must generously <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">allow</span></em>
          it, if your sanction is so necessary,”</span> Katya added
          viciously. She paused and smiled.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He talks about some hymn,”</span> she went on again,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“some cross he has to bear, some duty; I
          remember Ivan Fyodorovitch told me a great deal about it, and if
          you knew how he talked!”</span> Katya cried suddenly, with feeling
          she could not repress, <span class="tei tei-q">“if you knew how he
          loved that wretched man at the moment he told me, and how he hated
          him, perhaps, at the same moment. And I heard his story and his
          tears with sneering disdain. Brute! Yes, I am a brute. I am
          responsible for his fever. But that man in prison is incapable of
          suffering,”</span> Katya concluded irritably. <span class="tei tei-q">“Can such a man suffer? Men like him never
          suffer!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was a note
          of hatred and contemptuous repulsion in her words. And yet it was
          she who had betrayed him. <span class="tei tei-q">“Perhaps because
          she feels how she's wronged him she hates him at moments,”</span>
          Alyosha thought to himself. He hoped that it was only <span class="tei tei-q">“at moments.”</span> In Katya's last words he detected
          a challenging note, but he did not take it up.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I sent for you this morning to make you promise to
          persuade him yourself. Or do you, too, consider that to escape
          would be dishonorable, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page859">[pg
          859]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg859" name="Pg859"></a>
          cowardly, or something ... unchristian, perhaps?”</span> Katya
          added, even more defiantly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, no. I'll tell him everything,”</span> muttered
          Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“He asks you to come and see him
          to-day,”</span> he blurted out suddenly, looking her steadily in
          the face. She started, and drew back a little from him on the
          sofa.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Me? Can that be?”</span> she faltered, turning
          pale.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It can and ought to be!”</span> Alyosha began
          emphatically, growing more animated. <span class="tei tei-q">“He
          needs you particularly just now. I would not have opened the
          subject and worried you, if it were not necessary. He is ill, he is
          beside himself, he keeps asking for you. It is not to be reconciled
          with you that he wants you, but only that you would go and show
          yourself at his door. So much has happened to him since that day.
          He realizes that he has injured you beyond all reckoning. He does
          not ask your forgiveness—<span class="tei tei-q">‘It's impossible
          to forgive me,’</span> he says himself—but only that you would show
          yourself in his doorway.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's so sudden....”</span> faltered Katya.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I've had a presentiment all these days
          that you would come with that message. I knew he would ask me to
          come. It's impossible!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let it be impossible, but do it. Only think, he
          realizes for the first time how he has wounded you, the first time
          in his life; he had never grasped it before so fully. He said,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘If she refuses to come I shall be unhappy
          all my life.’</span> Do you hear? though he is condemned to penal
          servitude for twenty years, he is still planning to be happy—is not
          that piteous? Think—you must visit him; though he is ruined, he is
          innocent,”</span> broke like a challenge from Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“His hands are clean, there is no blood on them! For
          the sake of his infinite sufferings in the future visit him now.
          Go, greet him on his way into the darkness—stand at his door, that
          is all.... You ought to do it, you ought to!”</span> Alyosha
          concluded, laying immense stress on the word <span class="tei tei-q">“ought.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I ought to ... but I cannot....”</span> Katya moaned.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“He will look at me.... I
          can't.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Your eyes ought to meet. How will you live all your
          life, if you don't make up your mind to do it now?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Better suffer all my life.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page860">[pg 860]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg860" name="Pg860"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You ought to go, you ought to go,”</span> Alyosha
          repeated with merciless emphasis.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But why to-day, why at once?... I can't leave our
          patient—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You can for a moment. It will only be a moment. If you
          don't come, he will be in delirium by to-night. I would not tell
          you a lie; have pity on him!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Have pity on <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">me!</span></em>”</span> Katya said, with
          bitter reproach, and she burst into tears.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Then you will come,”</span> said Alyosha firmly,
          seeing her tears. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll go and tell him you
          will come directly.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, don't tell him so on any account,”</span> cried
          Katya in alarm. <span class="tei tei-q">“I will come, but don't
          tell him beforehand, for perhaps I may go, but not go in.... I
          don't know yet—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Her voice failed
          her. She gasped for breath. Alyosha got up to go.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And what if I meet any one?”</span> she said suddenly,
          in a low voice, turning white again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's just why you must go now, to avoid meeting any
          one. There will be no one there, I can tell you that for certain.
          We will expect you,”</span> he concluded emphatically, and went out
          of the room.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 4.00em; margin-bottom: 4.00em">
<a id="toc223" name="toc223"></a> <a id="pdf224" name="pdf224"></a>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.88em; text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter II. For A Moment The Lie
          Becomes Truth</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He hurried to
          the hospital where Mitya was lying now. The day after his fate was
          determined, Mitya had fallen ill with nervous fever, and was sent
          to the prison division of the town hospital. But at the request of
          several persons (Alyosha, Madame Hohlakov, Lise, etc.), Doctor
          Varvinsky had put Mitya not with other prisoners, but in a separate
          little room, the one where Smerdyakov had been. It is true that
          there was a sentinel at the other end of the corridor, and there
          was a grating over the window, so that Varvinsky could be at ease
          about the indulgence he had shown, which was not quite legal,
          indeed; but he was a kind-hearted and compassionate young man. He
          knew how hard it would be for a man like Mitya to pass at once so
          suddenly into the society of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page861">[pg 861]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg861" name="Pg861"></a> robbers and murderers, and that he must get
          used to it by degrees. The visits of relations and friends were
          informally sanctioned by the doctor and overseer, and even by the
          police captain. But only Alyosha and Grushenka had visited Mitya.
          Rakitin had tried to force his way in twice, but Mitya persistently
          begged Varvinsky not to admit him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha found
          him sitting on his bed in a hospital dressing-gown, rather
          feverish, with a towel, soaked in vinegar and water, on his head.
          He looked at Alyosha as he came in with an undefined expression,
          but there was a shade of something like dread discernible in it. He
          had become terribly preoccupied since the trial; sometimes he would
          be silent for half an hour together, and seemed to be pondering
          something heavily and painfully, oblivious of everything about him.
          If he roused himself from his brooding and began to talk, he always
          spoke with a kind of abruptness and never of what he really wanted
          to say. He looked sometimes with a face of suffering at his
          brother. He seemed to be more at ease with Grushenka than with
          Alyosha. It is true, he scarcely spoke to her at all, but as soon
          as she came in, his whole face lighted up with joy.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha sat down
          beside him on the bed in silence. This time Mitya was waiting for
          Alyosha in suspense, but he did not dare ask him a question. He
          felt it almost unthinkable that Katya would consent to come, and at
          the same time he felt that if she did not come, something
          inconceivable would happen. Alyosha understood his feelings.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Trifon Borissovitch,”</span> Mitya began nervously,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“has pulled his whole inn to pieces, I am
          told. He's taken up the flooring, pulled apart the planks, split up
          all the gallery, I am told. He is seeking treasure all the time—the
          fifteen hundred roubles which the prosecutor said I'd hidden there.
          He began playing these tricks, they say, as soon as he got home.
          Serve him right, the swindler! The guard here told me yesterday; he
          comes from there.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Listen,”</span> began Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“She will come, but I don't know when. Perhaps to-day,
          perhaps in a few days, that I can't tell. But she will come, she
          will, that's certain.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya started,
          would have said something, but was silent. The news had a
          tremendous effect on him. It was evident that he would have liked
          terribly to know what had been said, but he was again <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page862">[pg 862]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg862" name="Pg862"></a> afraid to ask. Something cruel and
          contemptuous from Katya would have cut him like a knife at that
          moment.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“This was what she said among other things; that I must
          be sure to set your conscience at rest about escaping. If Ivan is
          not well by then she will see to it all herself.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You've spoken of that already,”</span> Mitya observed
          musingly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And you have repeated it to Grusha,”</span> observed
          Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes,”</span> Mitya admitted. <span class="tei tei-q">“She won't come this morning.”</span> He looked timidly
          at his brother. <span class="tei tei-q">“She won't come till the
          evening. When I told her yesterday that Katya was taking measures,
          she was silent, but she set her mouth. She only whispered,
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘Let her!’</span> She understood that it
          was important. I did not dare to try her further. She understands
          now, I think, that Katya no longer cares for me, but loves
          Ivan.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Does she?”</span> broke from Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Perhaps she does not. Only she is not coming this
          morning,”</span> Mitya hastened to explain again; <span class="tei tei-q">“I asked her to do something for me. You know, Ivan is
          superior to all of us. He ought to live, not us. He will
          recover.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Would you believe it, though Katya is alarmed about
          him, she scarcely doubts of his recovery,”</span> said Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That means that she is convinced he will die. It's
          because she is frightened she's so sure he will get
          well.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ivan has a strong constitution, and I, too, believe
          there's every hope that he will get well,”</span> Alyosha observed
          anxiously.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, he will get well. But she is convinced that he
          will die. She has a great deal of sorrow to bear...”</span> A
          silence followed. A grave anxiety was fretting Mitya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, I love Grusha terribly,”</span> he said
          suddenly in a shaking voice, full of tears.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They won't let her go out there to you,”</span>
          Alyosha put in at once.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And there is something else I wanted to tell
          you,”</span> Mitya went on, with a sudden ring in his voice.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“If they beat me on the way or out there, I
          won't submit to it. I shall kill some one, and shall be shot for
          it. And this will be going on for twenty years! They speak to me
          rudely as it is. I've been lying here all night, passing judgment
          on myself. I am not ready! I am not able to resign myself. I wanted
          to sing a <span class="tei tei-q">‘hymn’</span>; but if a guard
          speaks rudely <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page863">[pg
          863]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg863" name="Pg863"></a>
          to me, I have not the strength to bear it. For Grusha I would bear
          anything ... anything except blows.... But she won't be allowed to
          come there.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha smiled
          gently.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Listen, brother, once for all,”</span> he said.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“This is what I think about it. And you
          know that I would not tell you a lie. Listen: you are not ready,
          and such a cross is not for you. What's more, you don't need such a
          martyr's cross when you are not ready for it. If you had murdered
          our father, it would grieve me that you should reject your
          punishment. But you are innocent, and such a cross is too much for
          you. You wanted to make yourself another man by suffering. I say,
          only remember that other man always, all your life and wherever you
          go; and that will be enough for you. Your refusal of that great
          cross will only serve to make you feel all your life an even
          greater duty, and that constant feeling will do more to make you a
          new man, perhaps, than if you went there. For there you would not
          endure it and would repine, and perhaps at last would say:
          <span class="tei tei-q">‘I am quits.’</span> The lawyer was right
          about that. Such heavy burdens are not for all men. For some they
          are impossible. These are my thoughts about it, if you want them so
          much. If other men would have to answer for your escape, officers
          or soldiers, then I would not have <span class="tei tei-q">‘allowed’</span> you,”</span> smiled Alyosha.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“But they declare—the superintendent of
          that <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">étape</span></span> told Ivan himself—that if
          it's well managed there will be no great inquiry, and that they can
          get off easily. Of course, bribing is dishonest even in such a
          case, but I can't undertake to judge about it, because if Ivan and
          Katya commissioned me to act for you, I know I should go and give
          bribes. I must tell you the truth. And so I can't judge of your own
          action. But let me assure you that I shall never condemn you. And
          it would be a strange thing if I could judge you in this. Now I
          think I've gone into everything.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I do condemn myself!”</span> cried Mitya.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“I shall escape, that was settled apart
          from you; could Mitya Karamazov do anything but run away? But I
          shall condemn myself, and I will pray for my sin for ever. That's
          how the Jesuits talk, isn't it? Just as we are doing?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes.”</span> Alyosha smiled gently.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I love you for always telling the whole truth and
          never hiding <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page864">[pg
          864]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg864" name="Pg864"></a>
          anything,”</span> cried Mitya, with a joyful laugh. <span class="tei tei-q">“So I've caught my Alyosha being Jesuitical. I must
          kiss you for that. Now listen to the rest; I'll open the other side
          of my heart to you. This is what I planned and decided. If I run
          away, even with money and a passport, and even to America, I should
          be cheered up by the thought that I am not running away for
          pleasure, not for happiness, but to another exile as bad, perhaps,
          as Siberia. It is as bad, Alyosha, it is! I hate that America, damn
          it, already. Even though Grusha will be with me. Just look at her;
          is she an American? She is Russian, Russian to the marrow of her
          bones; she will be homesick for the mother country, and I shall see
          every hour that she is suffering for my sake, that she has taken up
          that cross for me. And what harm has she done? And how shall I,
          too, put up with the rabble out there, though they may be better
          than I, every one of them? I hate that America already! And though
          they may be wonderful at machinery, every one of them, damn them,
          they are not of my soul. I love Russia, Alyosha, I love the Russian
          God, though I am a scoundrel myself. I shall choke there!”</span>
          he exclaimed, his eyes suddenly flashing. His voice was trembling
          with tears. <span class="tei tei-q">“So this is what I've decided,
          Alyosha, listen,”</span> he began again, mastering his emotion.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“As soon as I arrive there with Grusha, we
          will set to work at once on the land, in solitude, somewhere very
          remote, with wild bears. There must be some remote parts even
          there. I am told there are still Redskins there, somewhere, on the
          edge of the horizon. So to the country of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Last of the
          Mohicans</span></span>, and there we'll tackle the grammar at once,
          Grusha and I. Work and grammar—that's how we'll spend three years.
          And by that time we shall speak English like any Englishman. And as
          soon as we've learnt it—good-by to America! We'll run here to
          Russia as American citizens. Don't be uneasy—we would not come to
          this little town. We'd hide somewhere, a long way off, in the north
          or in the south. I shall be changed by that time, and she will,
          too, in America. The doctors shall make me some sort of wart on my
          face—what's the use of their being so mechanical!—or else I'll put
          out one eye, let my beard grow a yard, and I shall turn gray,
          fretting for Russia. I dare say they won't recognize us. And if
          they do, let them send us to Siberia. I don't care. It will show
          it's our fate. We'll work on the land here, too, somewhere in the
          wilds, and I'll make up as an <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page865">[pg 865]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg865" name="Pg865"></a> American all my life. But we shall die on our
          own soil. That's my plan, and it shan't be altered. Do you
          approve?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes,”</span> said Alyosha, not wanting to contradict
          him. Mitya paused for a minute and said suddenly:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And how they worked it up at the trial! Didn't they
          work it up!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If they had not, you would have been convicted just
          the same,”</span> said Alyosha, with a sigh.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, people are sick of me here! God bless them, but
          it's hard,”</span> Mitya moaned miserably. Again there was silence
          for a minute.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, put me out of my misery at once!”</span> he
          exclaimed suddenly. <span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me, is she coming
          now, or not? Tell me? What did she say? How did she say
          it?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“She said she would come, but I don't know whether she
          will come to-day. It's hard for her, you know,”</span> Alyosha
          looked timidly at his brother.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I should think it is hard for her! Alyosha, it will
          drive me out of my mind. Grusha keeps looking at me. She
          understands. My God, calm my heart: what is it I want? I want
          Katya! Do I understand what I want? It's the headstrong, evil
          Karamazov spirit! No, I am not fit for suffering. I am a scoundrel,
          that's all one can say.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Here she is!”</span> cried Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that instant
          Katya appeared in the doorway. For a moment she stood still, gazing
          at Mitya with a dazed expression. He leapt impulsively to his feet,
          and a scared look came into his face. He turned pale, but a timid,
          pleading smile appeared on his lips at once, and with an
          irresistible impulse he held out both hands to Katya. Seeing it,
          she flew impetuously to him. She seized him by the hands, and
          almost by force made him sit down on the bed. She sat down beside
          him, and still keeping his hands pressed them violently. Several
          times they both strove to speak, but stopped short and again gazed
          speechless with a strange smile, their eyes fastened on one
          another. So passed two minutes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Have you forgiven me?”</span> Mitya faltered at last,
          and at the same moment turning to Alyosha, his face working with
          joy, he cried, <span class="tei tei-q">“Do you hear what I am
          asking, do you hear?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's what I loved you for, that you are generous at
          heart!”</span> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page866">[pg
          866]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg866" name="Pg866"></a>
          broke from Katya. <span class="tei tei-q">“My forgiveness is no
          good to you, nor yours to me; whether you forgive me or not, you
          will always be a sore place in my heart, and I in yours—so it must
          be....”</span> She stopped to take breath. <span class="tei tei-q">“What have I come for?”</span> she began again with
          nervous haste: <span class="tei tei-q">“to embrace your feet, to
          press your hands like this, till it hurts—you remember how in
          Moscow I used to squeeze them—to tell you again that you are my
          god, my joy, to tell you that I love you madly,”</span> she moaned
          in anguish, and suddenly pressed his hand greedily to her lips.
          Tears streamed from her eyes. Alyosha stood speechless and
          confounded; he had never expected what he was seeing.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Love is over, Mitya!”</span> Katya began again,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“but the past is painfully dear to me. Know
          that you will always be so. But now let what might have been come
          true for one minute,”</span> she faltered, with a drawn smile,
          looking into his face joyfully again. <span class="tei tei-q">“You
          love another woman, and I love another man, and yet I shall love
          you for ever, and you will love me; do you know that? Do you hear?
          Love me, love me all your life!”</span> she cried, with a quiver
          almost of menace in her voice.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I shall love you, and ... do you know, Katya,”</span>
          Mitya began, drawing a deep breath at each word, <span class="tei tei-q">“do you know, five days ago, that same evening, I loved
          you.... When you fell down and were carried out ... All my life! So
          it will be, so it will always be—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So they murmured
          to one another frantic words, almost meaningless, perhaps not even
          true, but at that moment it was all true, and they both believed
          what they said implicitly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Katya,”</span> cried Mitya suddenly, <span class="tei tei-q">“do you believe I murdered him? I know you don't
          believe it now, but then ... when you gave evidence.... Surely,
          surely you did not believe it!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I did not believe it even then. I've never believed
          it. I hated you, and for a moment I persuaded myself. While I was
          giving evidence I persuaded myself and believed it, but when I'd
          finished speaking I left off believing it at once. Don't doubt
          that! I have forgotten that I came here to punish myself,”</span>
          she said, with a new expression in her voice, quite unlike the
          loving tones of a moment before.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Woman, yours is a heavy burden,”</span> broke, as it
          were, involuntarily from Mitya.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page867">[pg 867]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg867" name="Pg867"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let me go,”</span> she whispered. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll come again. It's more than I can bear
          now.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She was getting
          up from her place, but suddenly uttered a loud scream and staggered
          back. Grushenka walked suddenly and noiselessly into the room. No
          one had expected her. Katya moved swiftly to the door, but when she
          reached Grushenka, she stopped suddenly, turned as white as chalk
          and moaned softly, almost in a whisper:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Forgive me!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Grushenka stared
          at her and, pausing for an instant, in a vindictive, venomous
          voice, answered:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We are full of hatred, my girl, you and I! We are both
          full of hatred! As though we could forgive one another! Save him,
          and I'll worship you all my life.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You won't forgive her!”</span> cried Mitya, with
          frantic reproach.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't be anxious, I'll save him for you!”</span> Katya
          whispered rapidly, and she ran out of the room.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And you could refuse to forgive her when she begged
          your forgiveness herself?”</span> Mitya exclaimed bitterly
          again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mitya, don't dare to blame her; you have no right
          to!”</span> Alyosha cried hotly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Her proud lips spoke, not her heart,”</span> Grushenka
          brought out in a tone of disgust. <span class="tei tei-q">“If she
          saves you I'll forgive her everything—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She stopped
          speaking, as though suppressing something. She could not yet
          recover herself. She had come in, as appeared afterwards,
          accidentally, with no suspicion of what she would meet.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Alyosha, run after her!”</span> Mitya cried to his
          brother; <span class="tei tei-q">“tell her ... I don't know ...
          don't let her go away like this!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I'll come to you again at nightfall,”</span> said
          Alyosha, and he ran after Katya. He overtook her outside the
          hospital grounds. She was walking fast, but as soon as Alyosha
          caught her up she said quickly:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, before that woman I can't punish myself! I asked
          her forgiveness because I wanted to punish myself to the bitter
          end. She would not forgive me.... I like her for that!”</span> she
          added, in an unnatural voice, and her eyes flashed with fierce
          resentment.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“My brother did not expect this in the least,”</span>
          muttered Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“He was sure she would
          not come—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No doubt. Let us leave that,”</span> she snapped.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Listen: I can't <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page868">[pg 868]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg868" name="Pg868"></a> go with you to the funeral now. I've sent
          them flowers. I think they still have money. If necessary, tell
          them I'll never abandon them.... Now leave me, leave me, please.
          You are late as it is—the bells are ringing for the service....
          Leave me, please!”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
<a id="toc225" name="toc225"></a> <a id="pdf226" name="pdf226"></a>
<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.88em; margin-bottom: 2.88em; text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter III. Ilusha's Funeral. The
          Speech At The Stone</span></h2>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He really was
          late. They had waited for him and had already decided to bear the
          pretty flower-decked little coffin to the church without him. It
          was the coffin of poor little Ilusha. He had died two days after
          Mitya was sentenced. At the gate of the house Alyosha was met by
          the shouts of the boys, Ilusha's schoolfellows. They had all been
          impatiently expecting him and were glad that he had come at last.
          There were about twelve of them, they all had their school-bags or
          satchels on their shoulders. <span class="tei tei-q">“Father will
          cry, be with father,”</span> Ilusha had told them as he lay dying,
          and the boys remembered it. Kolya Krassotkin was the foremost of
          them.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“How glad I am you've come, Karamazov!”</span> he
          cried, holding out his hand to Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's awful here. It's really horrible to see it.
          Snegiryov is not drunk, we know for a fact he's had nothing to
          drink to-day, but he seems as if he were drunk ... I am always
          manly, but this is awful. Karamazov, if I am not keeping you, one
          question before you go in?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What is it, Kolya?”</span> said Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Is your brother innocent or guilty? Was it he killed
          your father or was it the valet? As you say, so it will be. I
          haven't slept for the last four nights for thinking of
          it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The valet killed him, my brother is innocent,”</span>
          answered Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's what I said,”</span> cried Smurov.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“So he will perish an innocent victim!”</span>
          exclaimed Kolya; <span class="tei tei-q">“though he is ruined he is
          happy! I could envy him!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean? How can you? Why?”</span> cried
          Alyosha surprised.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page869">[pg
          869]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg869" name="Pg869"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, if I, too, could sacrifice myself some day for
          truth!”</span> said Kolya with enthusiasm.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But not in such a cause, not with such disgrace and
          such horror!”</span> said Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Of course ... I should like to die for all humanity,
          and as for disgrace, I don't care about that—our names may perish.
          I respect your brother!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And so do I!”</span> the boy, who had once declared
          that he knew who had founded Troy, cried suddenly and unexpectedly,
          and he blushed up to his ears like a peony as he had done on that
          occasion.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha went
          into the room. Ilusha lay with his hands folded and his eyes closed
          in a blue coffin with a white frill round it. His thin face was
          hardly changed at all, and strange to say there was no smell of
          decay from the corpse. The expression of his face was serious and,
          as it were, thoughtful. His hands, crossed over his breast, looked
          particularly beautiful, as though chiseled in marble. There were
          flowers in his hands and the coffin, inside and out, was decked
          with flowers, which had been sent early in the morning by Lise
          Hohlakov. But there were flowers too from Katerina Ivanovna, and
          when Alyosha opened the door, the captain had a bunch in his
          trembling hands and was strewing them again over his dear boy. He
          scarcely glanced at Alyosha when he came in, and he would not look
          at any one, even at his crazy weeping wife, <span class="tei tei-q">“mamma,”</span> who kept trying to stand on her
          crippled legs to get a nearer look at her dead boy. Nina had been
          pushed in her chair by the boys close up to the coffin. She sat
          with her head pressed to it and she too was no doubt quietly
          weeping. Snegiryov's face looked eager, yet bewildered and
          exasperated. There was something crazy about his gestures and the
          words that broke from him. <span class="tei tei-q">“Old man, dear
          old man!”</span> he exclaimed every minute, gazing at Ilusha. It
          was his habit to call Ilusha <span class="tei tei-q">“old
          man,”</span> as a term of affection when he was alive.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Father, give me a flower, too; take that white one out
          of his hand and give it me,”</span> the crazy mother begged,
          whimpering. Either because the little white rose in Ilusha's hand
          had caught her fancy or that she wanted one from his hand to keep
          in memory of him, she moved restlessly, stretching out her hands
          for the flower.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I won't give it to any one, I won't give you
          anything,”</span> Snegiryov <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page870">[pg 870]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg870" name="Pg870"></a> cried callously. <span class="tei tei-q">“They are his flowers, not yours! Everything is his,
          nothing is yours!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Father, give mother a flower!”</span> said Nina,
          lifting her face wet with tears.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I won't give away anything and to her less than any
          one! She didn't love Ilusha. She took away his little cannon and he
          gave it to her,”</span> the captain broke into loud sobs at the
          thought of how Ilusha had given up his cannon to his mother. The
          poor, crazy creature was bathed in noiseless tears, hiding her face
          in her hands.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boys, seeing
          that the father would not leave the coffin and that it was time to
          carry it out, stood round it in a close circle and began to lift it
          up.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't want him to be buried in the
          churchyard,”</span> Snegiryov wailed suddenly; <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll bury him by the stone, by our stone! Ilusha told
          me to. I won't let him be carried out!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He had been
          saying for the last three days that he would bury him by the stone,
          but Alyosha, Krassotkin, the landlady, her sister and all the boys
          interfered.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What an idea, bury him by an unholy stone, as though
          he had hanged himself!”</span> the old landlady said sternly.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“There in the churchyard the ground has
          been crossed. He'll be prayed for there. One can hear the singing
          in church and the deacon reads so plainly and verbally that it will
          reach him every time just as though it were read over his
          grave.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At last the
          captain made a gesture of despair as though to say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Take him where you will.”</span> The boys raised the
          coffin, but as they passed the mother, they stopped for a moment
          and lowered it that she might say good-by to Ilusha. But on seeing
          that precious little face, which for the last three days she had
          only looked at from a distance, she trembled all over and her gray
          head began twitching spasmodically over the coffin.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mother, make the sign of the cross over him, give him
          your blessing, kiss him,”</span> Nina cried to her. But her head
          still twitched like an automaton and with a face contorted with
          bitter grief she began, without a word, beating her breast with her
          fist. They carried the coffin past her. Nina pressed her lips to
          her brother's for the last time as they bore the coffin by her. As
          Alyosha went out of the house he begged the landlady to look after
          those who <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page871">[pg
          871]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg871" name="Pg871"></a>
          were left behind, but she interrupted him before he had
          finished.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“To be sure, I'll stay with them, we are Christians,
          too.”</span> The old woman wept as she said it.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They had not far
          to carry the coffin to the church, not more than three hundred
          paces. It was a still, clear day, with a slight frost. The church
          bells were still ringing. Snegiryov ran fussing and distracted
          after the coffin, in his short old summer overcoat, with his head
          bare and his soft, old, wide-brimmed hat in his hand. He seemed in
          a state of bewildered anxiety. At one minute he stretched out his
          hand to support the head of the coffin and only hindered the
          bearers, at another he ran alongside and tried to find a place for
          himself there. A flower fell on the snow and he rushed to pick it
          up as though everything in the world depended on the loss of that
          flower.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And the crust of bread, we've forgotten the
          crust!”</span> he cried suddenly in dismay. But the boys reminded
          him at once that he had taken the crust of bread already and that
          it was in his pocket. He instantly pulled it out and was
          reassured.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ilusha told me to, Ilusha,”</span> he explained at
          once to Alyosha. <span class="tei tei-q">“I was sitting by him one
          night and he suddenly told me: <span class="tei tei-q">‘Father,
          when my grave is filled up crumble a piece of bread on it so that
          the sparrows may fly down, I shall hear and it will cheer me up not
          to be lying alone.’</span> ”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's a good thing,”</span> said Alyosha,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“we must often take some.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Every day, every day!”</span> said the captain
          quickly, seeming cheered at the thought.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They reached the
          church at last and set the coffin in the middle of it. The boys
          surrounded it and remained reverently standing so, all through the
          service. It was an old and rather poor church; many of the ikons
          were without settings; but such churches are the best for praying
          in. During the mass Snegiryov became somewhat calmer, though at
          times he had outbursts of the same unconscious and, as it were,
          incoherent anxiety. At one moment he went up to the coffin to set
          straight the cover or the wreath, when a candle fell out of the
          candlestick he rushed to replace it and was a fearful time fumbling
          over it, then he subsided and stood quietly by the coffin with a
          look of blank uneasiness and perplexity. After the Epistle he
          suddenly whispered to Alyosha, who was standing beside <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page872">[pg 872]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg872" name="Pg872"></a> him, that the Epistle had not been read
          properly but did not explain what he meant. During the prayer,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Like the Cherubim,”</span> he joined in
          the singing but did not go on to the end. Falling on his knees, he
          pressed his forehead to the stone floor and lay so for a long
          while.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At last came the
          funeral service itself and candles were distributed. The distracted
          father began fussing about again, but the touching and impressive
          funeral prayers moved and roused his soul. He seemed suddenly to
          shrink together and broke into rapid, short sobs, which he tried at
          first to smother, but at last he sobbed aloud. When they began
          taking leave of the dead and closing the coffin, he flung his arms
          about, as though he would not allow them to cover Ilusha, and began
          greedily and persistently kissing his dead boy on the lips. At last
          they succeeded in persuading him to come away from the step, but
          suddenly he impulsively stretched out his hand and snatched a few
          flowers from the coffin. He looked at them and a new idea seemed to
          dawn upon him, so that he apparently forgot his grief for a minute.
          Gradually he seemed to sink into brooding and did not resist when
          the coffin was lifted up and carried to the grave. It was an
          expensive one in the churchyard close to the church, Katerina
          Ivanovna had paid for it. After the customary rites the
          grave-diggers lowered the coffin. Snegiryov with his flowers in his
          hands bent down so low over the open grave that the boys caught
          hold of his coat in alarm and pulled him back. He did not seem to
          understand fully what was happening. When they began filling up the
          grave, he suddenly pointed anxiously at the falling earth and began
          trying to say something, but no one could make out what he meant,
          and he stopped suddenly. Then he was reminded that he must crumble
          the bread and he was awfully excited, snatched up the bread and
          began pulling it to pieces and flinging the morsels on the
          grave.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Come, fly down, birds, fly down, sparrows!”</span> he
          muttered anxiously.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">One of the boys
          observed that it was awkward for him to crumble the bread with the
          flowers in his hands and suggested he should give them to some one
          to hold for a time. But he would not do this and seemed indeed
          suddenly alarmed for his flowers, as though they wanted to take
          them from him altogether. And after looking at the grave, and as it
          were, satisfying himself that everything had been <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page873">[pg 873]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg873" name="Pg873"></a> done and the bread had been crumbled,
          he suddenly, to the surprise of every one, turned, quite composedly
          even, and made his way homewards. But his steps became more and
          more hurried, he almost ran. The boys and Alyosha kept up with
          him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The flowers are for mamma, the flowers are for mamma!
          I was unkind to mamma,”</span> he began exclaiming suddenly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Some one called
          to him to put on his hat as it was cold. But he flung the hat in
          the snow as though he were angry and kept repeating, <span class="tei tei-q">“I won't have the hat, I won't have the hat.”</span>
          Smurov picked it up and carried it after him. All the boys were
          crying, and Kolya and the boy who discovered about Troy most of
          all. Though Smurov, with the captain's hat in his hand, was crying
          bitterly too, he managed, as he ran, to snatch up a piece of red
          brick that lay on the snow of the path, to fling it at the flock of
          sparrows that was flying by. He missed them, of course, and went on
          crying as he ran. Half-way, Snegiryov suddenly stopped, stood still
          for half a minute, as though struck by something, and suddenly
          turning back to the church, ran towards the deserted grave. But the
          boys instantly overtook him and caught hold of him on all sides.
          Then he fell helpless on the snow as though he had been knocked
          down, and struggling, sobbing, and wailing, he began crying out,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Ilusha, old man, dear old man!”</span>
          Alyosha and Kolya tried to make him get up, soothing and persuading
          him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Captain, give over, a brave man must show
          fortitude,”</span> muttered Kolya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You'll spoil the flowers,”</span> said Alyosha,
          <span class="tei tei-q">“and mamma is expecting them, she is
          sitting crying because you would not give her any before. Ilusha's
          little bed is still there—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, yes, mamma!”</span> Snegiryov suddenly
          recollected, <span class="tei tei-q">“they'll take away the bed,
          they'll take it away,”</span> he added as though alarmed that they
          really would. He jumped up and ran homewards again. But it was not
          far off and they all arrived together. Snegiryov opened the door
          hurriedly and called to his wife with whom he had so cruelly
          quarreled just before:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Mamma, poor crippled darling, Ilusha has sent you
          these flowers,”</span> he cried, holding out to her a little bunch
          of flowers that had been frozen and broken while he was struggling
          in the snow. But at that instant he saw in the corner, by the
          little bed, Ilusha's little boots, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page874">[pg 874]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg874" name="Pg874"></a> which the landlady had put tidily side by
          side. Seeing the old, patched, rusty-looking, stiff boots he flung
          up his hands and rushed to them, fell on his knees, snatched up one
          boot and, pressing his lips to it, began kissing it greedily,
          crying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ilusha, old man, dear old man,
          where are your little feet?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Where have you taken him away? Where have you taken
          him?”</span> the lunatic cried in a heartrending voice. Nina, too,
          broke into sobs. Kolya ran out of the room, the boys followed him.
          At last Alyosha too went out.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let them weep,”</span> he said to Kolya, <span class="tei tei-q">“it's no use trying to comfort them just now. Let us
          wait a minute and then go back.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, it's no use, it's awful,”</span> Kolya assented.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Do you know, Karamazov,”</span> he dropped
          his voice so that no one could hear them, <span class="tei tei-q">“I feel dreadfully sad, and if it were only possible to
          bring him back, I'd give anything in the world to do
          it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, so would I,”</span> said Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you think, Karamazov? Had we better come back
          here to-night? He'll be drunk, you know.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Perhaps he will. Let us come together, you and I, that
          will be enough, to spend an hour with them, with the mother and
          Nina. If we all come together we shall remind them of everything
          again,”</span> Alyosha suggested.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“The landlady is laying the table for them now—there'll
          be a funeral dinner or something, the priest is coming; shall we go
          back to it, Karamazov?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Of course,”</span> said Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's all so strange, Karamazov, such sorrow and then
          pancakes after it, it all seems so unnatural in our
          religion.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They are going to have salmon, too,”</span> the boy
          who had discovered about Troy observed in a loud voice.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I beg you most earnestly, Kartashov, not to interrupt
          again with your idiotic remarks, especially when one is not talking
          to you and doesn't care to know whether you exist or not!”</span>
          Kolya snapped out irritably. The boy flushed crimson but did not
          dare to reply.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Meantime they
          were strolling slowly along the path and suddenly Smurov
          exclaimed:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There's Ilusha's stone, under which they wanted to
          bury him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">They all stood
          still by the big stone. Alyosha looked and the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page875">[pg 875]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg875" name="Pg875"></a> whole picture of what Snegiryov had
          described to him that day, how Ilusha, weeping and hugging his
          father, had cried, <span class="tei tei-q">“Father, father, how he
          insulted you,”</span> rose at once before his imagination.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A sudden impulse
          seemed to come into his soul. With a serious and earnest expression
          he looked from one to another of the bright, pleasant faces of
          Ilusha's schoolfellows, and suddenly said to them:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Boys, I should like to say one word to you, here at
          this place.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boys stood
          round him and at once bent attentive and expectant eyes upon
          him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Boys, we shall soon part. I shall be for some time
          with my two brothers, of whom one is going to Siberia and the other
          is lying at death's door. But soon I shall leave this town, perhaps
          for a long time, so we shall part. Let us make a compact here, at
          Ilusha's stone, that we will never forget Ilusha and one another.
          And whatever happens to us later in life, if we don't meet for
          twenty years afterwards, let us always remember how we buried the
          poor boy at whom we once threw stones, do you remember, by the
          bridge? and afterwards we all grew so fond of him. He was a fine
          boy, a kind-hearted, brave boy, he felt for his father's honor and
          resented the cruel insult to him and stood up for him. And so in
          the first place, we will remember him, boys, all our lives. And
          even if we are occupied with most important things, if we attain to
          honor or fall into great misfortune—still let us remember how good
          it was once here, when we were all together, united by a good and
          kind feeling which made us, for the time we were loving that poor
          boy, better perhaps than we are. My little doves—let me call you
          so, for you are very like them, those pretty blue birds, at this
          minute as I look at your good dear faces. My dear children, perhaps
          you won't understand what I am saying to you, because I often speak
          very unintelligibly, but you'll remember it all the same and will
          agree with my words some time. You must know that there is nothing
          higher and stronger and more wholesome and good for life in the
          future than some good memory, especially a memory of childhood, of
          home. People talk to you a great deal about your education, but
          some good, sacred memory, preserved from childhood, is perhaps the
          best education. If a man carries many such memories with him into
          life, he is safe to the end of his days, and if one has only one
          good memory left in one's heart, even that may sometime be the
          means of saving us. Perhaps <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page876">[pg 876]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg876" name="Pg876"></a> we may even grow wicked later on, may be
          unable to refrain from a bad action, may laugh at men's tears and
          at those people who say as Kolya did just now, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I want to suffer for all men,’</span> and may even
          jeer spitefully at such people. But however bad we may become—which
          God forbid—yet, when we recall how we buried Ilusha, how we loved
          him in his last days, and how we have been talking like friends all
          together, at this stone, the cruelest and most mocking of us—if we
          do become so—will not dare to laugh inwardly at having been kind
          and good at this moment! What's more, perhaps, that one memory may
          keep him from great evil and he will reflect and say, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Yes, I was good and brave and honest then!’</span> Let
          him laugh to himself, that's no matter, a man often laughs at
          what's good and kind. That's only from thoughtlessness. But I
          assure you, boys, that as he laughs he will say at once in his
          heart, <span class="tei tei-q">‘No, I do wrong to laugh, for that's
          not a thing to laugh at.’</span> ”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That will be so, I understand you, Karamazov!”</span>
          cried Kolya, with flashing eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boys were
          excited and they, too, wanted to say something, but they restrained
          themselves, looking with intentness and emotion at the speaker.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I say this in case we become bad,”</span> Alyosha went
          on, <span class="tei tei-q">“but there's no reason why we should
          become bad, is there, boys? Let us be, first and above all, kind,
          then honest and then let us never forget each other! I say that
          again. I give you my word for my part that I'll never forget one of
          you. Every face looking at me now I shall remember even for thirty
          years. Just now Kolya said to Kartashov that we did not care to
          know whether he exists or not. But I cannot forget that Kartashov
          exists and that he is not blushing now as he did when he discovered
          the founders of Troy, but is looking at me with his jolly, kind,
          dear little eyes. Boys, my dear boys, let us all be generous and
          brave like Ilusha, clever, brave and generous like Kolya (though he
          will be ever so much cleverer when he is grown up), and let us all
          be as modest, as clever and sweet as Kartashov. But why am I
          talking about those two? You are all dear to me, boys, from this
          day forth, I have a place in my heart for you all, and I beg you to
          keep a place in your hearts for me! Well, and who has united us in
          this kind, good feeling which we shall remember and intend to
          remember all our lives? Who, if not <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page877">[pg 877]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg877" name="Pg877"></a> Ilusha, the good boy, the dear boy, precious
          to us for ever! Let us never forget him. May his memory live for
          ever in our hearts from this time forth!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, yes, for ever, for ever!”</span> the boys cried
          in their ringing voices, with softened faces.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let us remember his face and his clothes and his poor
          little boots, his coffin and his unhappy, sinful father, and how
          boldly he stood up for him alone against the whole
          school.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We will remember, we will remember,”</span> cried the
          boys. <span class="tei tei-q">“He was brave, he was
          good!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, how I loved him!”</span> exclaimed Kolya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, children, ah, dear friends, don't be afraid of
          life! How good life is when one does something good and
          just!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, yes,”</span> the boys repeated
          enthusiastically.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Karamazov, we love you!”</span> a voice, probably
          Kartashov's, cried impulsively.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We love you, we love you!”</span> they all caught it
          up. There were tears in the eyes of many of them.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Hurrah for Karamazov!”</span> Kolya shouted
          ecstatically.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And may the dead boy's memory live for ever!”</span>
          Alyosha added again with feeling.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“For ever!”</span> the boys chimed in again.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Karamazov,”</span> cried Kolya, <span class="tei tei-q">“can it be true what's taught us in religion, that we
          shall all rise again from the dead and shall live and see each
          other again, all, Ilusha too?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Certainly we shall all rise again, certainly we shall
          see each other and shall tell each other with joy and gladness all
          that has happened!”</span> Alyosha answered, half laughing, half
          enthusiastic.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ah, how splendid it will be!”</span> broke from
          Kolya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, now we will finish talking and go to his funeral
          dinner. Don't be put out at our eating pancakes—it's a very old
          custom and there's something nice in that!”</span> laughed Alyosha.
          <span class="tei tei-q">“Well, let us go! And now we go hand in
          hand.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And always so, all our lives hand in hand! Hurrah for
          Karamazov!”</span> Kolya cried once more rapturously, and once more
          the boys took up his exclamation: <span class="tei tei-q">“Hurrah
          for Karamazov!”</span></p>

</section></section></section></body></html>
