<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-3-3" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-3-3-4" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-top: 2.40em; margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter IV. The Second
            Ordeal</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You don't know how you encourage us, Dmitri
            Fyodorovitch, by your readiness to answer,”</span> said Nikolay
            Parfenovitch, with an animated air, and obvious satisfaction
            beaming in his very prominent, short-sighted, light gray eyes,
            from which he had removed his spectacles a moment before.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“And you have made a very just remark
            about the mutual confidence, without which it is sometimes
            positively impossible to get on in cases of such importance, if
            the suspected party really hopes and desires to defend himself
            and is in a position to do so. We, on our side, will do
            everything in our power, and you can see for yourself how we are
            conducting the case. You approve, Ippolit Kirillovitch?”</span>
            He turned to the prosecutor.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, undoubtedly,”</span> replied the prosecutor. His
            tone was somewhat cold, compared with Nikolay Parfenovitch's
            impulsiveness.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I will note
            once for all that Nikolay Parfenovitch, who had but lately
            arrived among us, had from the first felt marked respect for
            Ippolit Kirillovitch, our prosecutor, and had become almost his
            bosom friend. He was almost the only person who put implicit
            faith in Ippolit Kirillovitch's extraordinary talents as a
            psychologist and orator and in the justice of his grievance. He
            had heard of him in Petersburg. On the other hand, young Nikolay
            Parfenovitch was the only person in the whole world whom our
            <span class="tei tei-q">“unappreciated”</span> prosecutor
            genuinely liked. On their way to Mokroe they had time to come to
            an understanding about the present case. And now as they sat at
            the table, the sharp-witted junior caught and interpreted every
            indication on his senior colleague's face—half a word, a glance,
            or a wink.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen, only let me tell my own story and don't
            interrupt me with trivial questions and I'll tell you everything
            in a moment,”</span> said Mitya excitedly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Excellent! Thank you. But before we proceed to
            listen to your communication, will you allow me to inquire as to
            another little fact of great interest to us? I mean the ten
            roubles you borrowed <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page524">[pg
            524]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg524" name="Pg524"></a>
            yesterday at about five o'clock on the security of your pistols,
            from your friend, Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I pledged them, gentlemen. I pledged them for ten
            roubles. What more? That's all about it. As soon as I got back to
            town I pledged them.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You got back to town? Then you had been out of
            town?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, I went a journey of forty versts into the
            country. Didn't you know?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The prosecutor
            and Nikolay Parfenovitch exchanged glances.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, how would it be if you began your story with a
            systematic description of all you did yesterday, from the morning
            onwards? Allow us, for instance, to inquire why you were absent
            from the town, and just when you left and when you came back—all
            those facts.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You should have asked me like that from the
            beginning,”</span> cried Mitya, laughing aloud, <span class="tei tei-q">“and, if you like, we won't begin from yesterday, but
            from the morning of the day before; then you'll understand how,
            why, and where I went. I went the day before yesterday,
            gentlemen, to a merchant of the town, called Samsonov, to borrow
            three thousand roubles from him on safe security. It was a
            pressing matter, gentlemen, it was a sudden
            necessity.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Allow me to interrupt you,”</span> the prosecutor
            put in politely. <span class="tei tei-q">“Why were you in such
            pressing need for just that sum, three thousand?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, gentlemen, you needn't go into details, how,
            when and why, and why just so much money, and not so much, and
            all that rigmarole. Why, it'll run to three volumes, and then
            you'll want an epilogue!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya said all
            this with the good-natured but impatient familiarity of a man who
            is anxious to tell the whole truth and is full of the best
            intentions.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen!”</span>—he corrected himself
            hurriedly—<span class="tei tei-q">“don't be vexed with me for my
            restiveness, I beg you again. Believe me once more, I feel the
            greatest respect for you and understand the true position of
            affairs. Don't think I'm drunk. I'm quite sober now. And,
            besides, being drunk would be no hindrance. It's with me, you
            know, like the saying: <span class="tei tei-q">‘When he is sober,
            he is a fool; when he is drunk, he is a wise man.’</span> Ha ha!
            But I see, gentlemen, it's not the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page525">[pg 525]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg525" name="Pg525"></a> proper thing to make jokes to you, till
            we've had our explanation, I mean. And I've my own dignity to
            keep up, too. I quite understand the difference for the moment. I
            am, after all, in the position of a criminal, and so, far from
            being on equal terms with you. And it's your business to watch
            me. I can't expect you to pat me on the head for what I did to
            Grigory, for one can't break old men's heads with impunity. I
            suppose you'll put me away for him for six months, or a year
            perhaps, in a house of correction. I don't know what the
            punishment is—but it will be without loss of the rights of my
            rank, without loss of my rank, won't it? So you see, gentlemen, I
            understand the distinction between us.... But you must see that
            you could puzzle God Himself with such questions. <span class="tei tei-q">‘How did you step? Where did you step? When did you
            step? And on what did you step?’</span> I shall get mixed up, if
            you go on like this, and you will put it all down against me. And
            what will that lead to? To nothing! And even if it's nonsense I'm
            talking now, let me finish, and you, gentlemen, being men of
            honor and refinement, will forgive me! I'll finish by asking you,
            gentlemen, to drop that conventional method of questioning. I
            mean, beginning from some miserable trifle, how I got up, what I
            had for breakfast, how I spat, and where I spat, and so
            distracting the attention of the criminal, suddenly stun him with
            an overwhelming question, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Whom did you
            murder? Whom did you rob?’</span> Ha ha! That's your regulation
            method, that's where all your cunning comes in. You can put
            peasants off their guard like that, but not me. I know the
            tricks. I've been in the service, too. Ha ha ha! You're not
            angry, gentlemen? You forgive my impertinence?”</span> he cried,
            looking at them with a good-nature that was almost surprising.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“It's only Mitya Karamazov, you know, so
            you can overlook it. It would be inexcusable in a sensible man;
            but you can forgive it in Mitya. Ha ha!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nikolay
            Parfenovitch listened, and laughed too. Though the prosecutor did
            not laugh, he kept his eyes fixed keenly on Mitya, as though
            anxious not to miss the least syllable, the slightest movement,
            the smallest twitch of any feature of his face.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That's how we have treated you from the
            beginning,”</span> said Nikolay Parfenovitch, still laughing.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“We haven't tried to put you out by
            asking how you got up in the morning and what you had for
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page526">[pg 526]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg526" name="Pg526"></a> breakfast. We
            began, indeed, with questions of the greatest
            importance.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I understand. I saw it and appreciated it, and I
            appreciate still more your present kindness to me, an
            unprecedented kindness, worthy of your noble hearts. We three
            here are gentlemen, and let everything be on the footing of
            mutual confidence between educated, well-bred people, who have
            the common bond of noble birth and honor. In any case, allow me
            to look upon you as my best friends at this moment of my life, at
            this moment when my honor is assailed. That's no offense to you,
            gentlemen, is it?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“On the contrary. You've expressed all that so well,
            Dmitri Fyodorovitch,”</span> Nikolay Parfenovitch answered with
            dignified approbation.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“And enough of those trivial questions, gentlemen,
            all those tricky questions!”</span> cried Mitya enthusiastically.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Or there's simply no knowing where we
            shall get to! Is there?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I will follow your sensible advice entirely,”</span>
            the prosecutor interposed, addressing Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“I don't withdraw my question, however. It is now
            vitally important for us to know exactly why you needed that sum,
            I mean precisely three thousand.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Why I needed it?... Oh, for one thing and
            another.... Well, it was to pay a debt.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“A debt to whom?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That I absolutely refuse to answer, gentlemen. Not
            because I couldn't, or because I shouldn't dare, or because it
            would be damaging, for it's all a paltry matter and absolutely
            trifling, but—I won't, because it's a matter of principle: that's
            my private life, and I won't allow any intrusion into my private
            life. That's my principle. Your question has no bearing on the
            case, and whatever has nothing to do with the case is my private
            affair. I wanted to pay a debt. I wanted to pay a debt of honor
            but to whom I won't say.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Allow me to make a note of that,”</span> said the
            prosecutor.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“By all means. Write down that I won't say, that I
            won't. Write that I should think it dishonorable to say. Ech! you
            can write it; you've nothing else to do with your
            time.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Allow me to caution you, sir, and to remind you once
            more, if you are unaware of it,”</span> the prosecutor began,
            with a peculiar and stern impressiveness, <span class="tei tei-q">“that you have a perfect right not to answer
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page527">[pg 527]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg527" name="Pg527"></a> the questions put
            to you now, and we on our side have no right to extort an answer
            from you, if you decline to give it for one reason or another.
            That is entirely a matter for your personal decision. But it is
            our duty, on the other hand, in such cases as the present, to
            explain and set before you the degree of injury you will be doing
            yourself by refusing to give this or that piece of evidence.
            After which I will beg you to continue.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen, I'm not angry ... I ...”</span> Mitya
            muttered in a rather disconcerted tone. <span class="tei tei-q">“Well, gentlemen, you see, that Samsonov to whom I
            went then ...”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">We will, of
            course, not reproduce his account of what is known to the reader
            already. Mitya was impatiently anxious not to omit the slightest
            detail. At the same time he was in a hurry to get it over. But as
            he gave his evidence it was written down, and therefore they had
            continually to pull him up. Mitya disliked this, but submitted;
            got angry, though still good-humoredly. He did, it is true,
            exclaim, from time to time, <span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen,
            that's enough to make an angel out of patience!”</span> Or,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Gentlemen, it's no good your irritating
            me.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But even
            though he exclaimed he still preserved for a time his genially
            expansive mood. So he told them how Samsonov had made a fool of
            him two days before. (He had completely realized by now that he
            had been fooled.) The sale of his watch for six roubles to obtain
            money for the journey was something new to the lawyers. They were
            at once greatly interested, and even, to Mitya's intense
            indignation, thought it necessary to write the fact down as a
            secondary confirmation of the circumstance that he had hardly a
            farthing in his pocket at the time. Little by little Mitya began
            to grow surly. Then, after describing his journey to see Lyagavy,
            the night spent in the stifling hut, and so on, he came to his
            return to the town. Here he began, without being particularly
            urged, to give a minute account of the agonies of jealousy he
            endured on Grushenka's account.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He was heard
            with silent attention. They inquired particularly into the
            circumstance of his having a place of ambush in Marya
            Kondratyevna's house at the back of Fyodor Pavlovitch's garden to
            keep watch on Grushenka, and of Smerdyakov's bringing him
            information. They laid particular stress on this, and noted it
            down. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page528">[pg
            528]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg528" name="Pg528"></a>
            Of his jealousy he spoke warmly and at length, and though
            inwardly ashamed at exposing his most intimate feelings to
            <span class="tei tei-q">“public ignominy,”</span> so to speak, he
            evidently overcame his shame in order to tell the truth. The
            frigid severity, with which the investigating lawyer, and still
            more the prosecutor, stared intently at him as he told his story,
            disconcerted him at last considerably.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That boy, Nikolay Parfenovitch, to whom I was
            talking nonsense about women only a few days ago, and that sickly
            prosecutor are not worth my telling this to,”</span> he reflected
            mournfully. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's ignominious.
            <span class="tei tei-q">‘Be patient, humble, hold thy
            peace.’</span> ”</span> He wound up his reflections with that
            line. But he pulled himself together to go on again. When he came
            to telling of his visit to Madame Hohlakov, he regained his
            spirits and even wished to tell a little anecdote of that lady
            which had nothing to do with the case. But the investigating
            lawyer stopped him, and civilly suggested that he should pass on
            to <span class="tei tei-q">“more essential matters.”</span> At
            last, when he described his despair and told them how, when he
            left Madame Hohlakov's, he thought that he'd <span class="tei tei-q">“get three thousand if he had to murder some one to
            do it,”</span> they stopped him again and noted down that he had
            <span class="tei tei-q">“meant to murder some one.”</span> Mitya
            let them write it without protest. At last he reached the point
            in his story when he learned that Grushenka had deceived him and
            had returned from Samsonov's as soon as he left her there, though
            she had said that she would stay there till midnight.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If I didn't kill Fenya then, gentlemen, it was only
            because I hadn't time,”</span> broke from him suddenly at that
            point in his story. That, too, was carefully written down. Mitya
            waited gloomily, and was beginning to tell how he ran into his
            father's garden when the investigating lawyer suddenly stopped
            him, and opening the big portfolio that lay on the sofa beside
            him he brought out the brass pestle.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Do you recognize this object?”</span> he asked,
            showing it to Mitya.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, yes,”</span> he laughed gloomily. <span class="tei tei-q">“Of course I recognize it. Let me have a look at
            it.... Damn it, never mind!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You have forgotten to mention it,”</span> observed
            the investigating lawyer.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Hang it all, I shouldn't have concealed it from you.
            Do you <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page529">[pg
            529]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg529" name="Pg529"></a>
            suppose I could have managed without it? It simply escaped my
            memory.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Be so good as to tell us precisely how you came to
            arm yourself with it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Certainly I will be so good, gentlemen.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">And Mitya
            described how he took the pestle and ran.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But what object had you in view in arming yourself
            with such a weapon?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What object? No object. I just picked it up and ran
            off.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What for, if you had no object?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mitya's wrath
            flared up. He looked intently at <span class="tei tei-q">“the
            boy”</span> and smiled gloomily and malignantly. He was feeling
            more and more ashamed at having told <span class="tei tei-q">“such people”</span> the story of his jealousy so
            sincerely and spontaneously.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Bother the pestle!”</span> broke from him
            suddenly.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But still—”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, to keep off dogs.... Oh, because it was dark....
            In case anything turned up.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But have you ever on previous occasions taken a
            weapon with you when you went out, since you're afraid of the
            dark?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ugh! damn it all, gentlemen! There's positively no
            talking to you!”</span> cried Mitya, exasperated beyond
            endurance, and turning to the secretary, crimson with anger, he
            said quickly, with a note of fury in his voice:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Write down at once ... at once ... <span class="tei tei-q">‘that I snatched up the pestle to go and kill my
            father ... Fyodor Pavlovitch ... by hitting him on the head with
            it!’</span> Well, now are you satisfied, gentlemen? Are your
            minds relieved?”</span> he said, glaring defiantly at the
            lawyers.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“We quite understand that you made that statement
            just now through exasperation with us and the questions we put to
            you, which you consider trivial, though they are, in fact,
            essential,”</span> the prosecutor remarked dryly in reply.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, upon my word, gentlemen! Yes, I took the
            pestle.... What does one pick things up for at such moments? I
            don't know what for. I snatched it up and ran—that's all. For to
            me, gentlemen, <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">passons</span></span>, or I
            declare I won't tell you any more.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page530">[pg 530]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg530" name="Pg530"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He sat with
            his elbows on the table and his head in his hand. He sat sideways
            to them and gazed at the wall, struggling against a feeling of
            nausea. He had, in fact, an awful inclination to get up and
            declare that he wouldn't say another word, <span class="tei tei-q">“not if you hang me for it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You see, gentlemen,”</span> he said at last, with
            difficulty controlling himself, <span class="tei tei-q">“you see.
            I listen to you and am haunted by a dream.... It's a dream I have
            sometimes, you know.... I often dream it—it's always the same ...
            that some one is hunting me, some one I'm awfully afraid of ...
            that he's hunting me in the dark, in the night ... tracking me,
            and I hide somewhere from him, behind a door or cupboard, hide in
            a degrading way, and the worst of it is, he always knows where I
            am, but he pretends not to know where I am on purpose, to prolong
            my agony, to enjoy my terror.... That's just what you're doing
            now. It's just like that!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Is that the sort of thing you dream about?”</span>
            inquired the prosecutor.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, it is. Don't you want to write it down?”</span>
            said Mitya, with a distorted smile.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No; no need to write it down. But still you do have
            curious dreams.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“It's not a question of dreams now, gentlemen—this is
            realism, this is real life! I'm a wolf and you're the hunters.
            Well, hunt him down!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You are wrong to make such comparisons ...”</span>
            began Nikolay Parfenovitch, with extraordinary softness.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“No, I'm not wrong, not at all!”</span> Mitya flared
            up again, though his outburst of wrath had obviously relieved his
            heart. He grew more good-humored at every word. <span class="tei tei-q">“You may not trust a criminal or a man on trial
            tortured by your questions, but an honorable man, the honorable
            impulses of the heart (I say that boldly!)—no! That you must
            believe you have no right indeed ... but—</span></p>
<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em">
<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Be silent, heart,</span>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
<span style="font-size: 90%">Be patient, humble, hold thy
                  peace.</span>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">Well, shall I go on?”</span> he broke off
            gloomily.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“If you'll be so kind,”</span> answered Nikolay
            Parfenovitch.</p>
</div><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page531">[pg 531]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg531" name="Pg531"></a>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 3.00em; margin-top: 3.00em">
<a id="toc139" name="toc139"></a> <a id="pdf140" name="pdf140"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
