<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
            <section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
                  <section id="book-2-1" epub:type="division">
                        <section id="chapter-2-1-3" epub:type="chapter">

<h3 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-bottom: 2.40em; text-align: left; margin-top: 2.40em">
<span style="font-size: 120%">Chapter III. A Meeting With The
            Schoolboys</span></h3>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Thank goodness he did not ask me about
            Grushenka,”</span> thought Alyosha, as he left his father's house
            and turned towards Madame Hohlakov's, <span class="tei tei-q">“or
            I might have to tell him of my meeting with Grushenka
            yesterday.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha felt
            painfully that since yesterday both combatants had renewed their
            energies, and that their hearts had grown hard again.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Father is spiteful and angry, he's made
            some plan and will stick to it. And what of Dmitri? He too will
            be harder than yesterday, he too must be spiteful and angry, and
            he too, no doubt, has made some plan. Oh, I must succeed in
            finding him to-day, whatever happens.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But Alyosha
            had not long to meditate. An incident occurred on the road,
            which, though apparently of little consequence, made a great
            impression on him. Just after he had crossed the square and
            turned the corner coming out into Mihailovsky Street, which is
            divided by a small ditch from the High Street (our whole town
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page192">[pg 192]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg192" name="Pg192"></a> is intersected by
            ditches), he saw a group of schoolboys between the ages of nine
            and twelve, at the bridge. They were going home from school, some
            with their bags on their shoulders, others with leather satchels
            slung across them, some in short jackets, others in little
            overcoats. Some even had those high boots with creases round the
            ankles, such as little boys spoilt by rich fathers love to wear.
            The whole group was talking eagerly about something, apparently
            holding a council. Alyosha had never from his Moscow days been
            able to pass children without taking notice of them, and although
            he was particularly fond of children of three or thereabout, he
            liked schoolboys of ten and eleven too. And so, anxious as he was
            to-day, he wanted at once to turn aside to talk to them. He
            looked into their excited rosy faces, and noticed at once that
            all the boys had stones in their hands. Behind the ditch some
            thirty paces away, there was another schoolboy standing by a
            fence. He too had a satchel at his side. He was about ten years
            old, pale, delicate-looking and with sparkling black eyes. He
            kept an attentive and anxious watch on the other six, obviously
            his schoolfellows with whom he had just come out of school, but
            with whom he had evidently had a feud.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha went
            up and, addressing a fair, curly-headed, rosy boy in a black
            jacket, observed:</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“When I used to wear a satchel like yours, I always
            used to carry it on my left side, so as to have my right hand
            free, but you've got yours on your right side. So it will be
            awkward for you to get at it.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha had no
            art or premeditation in beginning with this practical remark. But
            it is the only way for a grown-up person to get at once into
            confidential relations with a child, or still more with a group
            of children. One must begin in a serious, businesslike way so as
            to be on a perfectly equal footing. Alyosha understood it by
            instinct.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But he is left-handed,”</span> another, a fine
            healthy-looking boy of eleven, answered promptly. All the others
            stared at Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He even throws stones with his left hand,”</span>
            observed a third.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At that
            instant a stone flew into the group, but only just grazed the
            left-handed boy, though it was well and vigorously thrown by the
            boy standing the other side of the ditch.</p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page193">[pg 193]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg193" name="Pg193"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Give it him, hit him back, Smurov,”</span> they all
            shouted. But Smurov, the left-handed boy, needed no telling, and
            at once revenged himself; he threw a stone, but it missed the boy
            and hit the ground. The boy the other side of the ditch, the
            pocket of whose coat was visibly bulging with stones, flung
            another stone at the group; this time it flew straight at Alyosha
            and hit him painfully on the shoulder.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He aimed it at you, he meant it for you. You are
            Karamazov, Karamazov!”</span> the boys shouted, laughing.
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Come, all throw at him at once!”</span>
            and six stones flew at the boy. One struck the boy on the head
            and he fell down, but at once leapt up and began ferociously
            returning their fire. Both sides threw stones incessantly. Many
            of the group had their pockets full too.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What are you about! Aren't you ashamed? Six against
            one! Why, you'll kill him,”</span> cried Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">He ran forward
            and met the flying stones to screen the solitary boy. Three or
            four ceased throwing for a minute.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He began first!”</span> cried a boy in a red shirt
            in an angry childish voice. <span class="tei tei-q">“He is a
            beast, he stabbed Krassotkin in class the other day with a
            penknife. It bled. Krassotkin wouldn't tell tales, but he must be
            thrashed.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But what for? I suppose you tease him.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“There, he sent a stone in your back again, he knows
            you,”</span> cried the children. <span class="tei tei-q">“It's
            you he is throwing at now, not us. Come, all of you, at him
            again, don't miss, Smurov!”</span> and again a fire of stones,
            and a very vicious one, began. The boy the other side of the
            ditch was hit in the chest; he screamed, began to cry and ran
            away uphill towards Mihailovsky Street. They all shouted:
            <span class="tei tei-q">“Aha, he is funking, he is running away.
            Wisp of tow!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You don't know what a beast he is, Karamazov,
            killing is too good for him,”</span> said the boy in the jacket,
            with flashing eyes. He seemed to be the eldest.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“What's wrong with him?”</span> asked Alyosha,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“is he a tell-tale or what?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boys
            looked at one another as though derisively.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Are you going that way, to Mihailovsky?”</span> the
            same boy went on. <span class="tei tei-q">“Catch him up.... You
            see he's stopped again, he is waiting and looking at
            you.”</span></p><span class="tei tei-pb" id="page194">[pg
            194]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg194" name="Pg194"></a>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“He is looking at you,”</span> the other boys chimed
            in.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You ask him, does he like a disheveled wisp of tow.
            Do you hear, ask him that!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">There was a
            general burst of laughter. Alyosha looked at them, and they at
            him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't go near him, he'll hurt you,”</span> cried
            Smurov in a warning voice.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I shan't ask him about the wisp of tow, for I expect
            you tease him with that question somehow. But I'll find out from
            him why you hate him so.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Find out then, find out,”</span> cried the boys,
            laughing.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Alyosha
            crossed the bridge and walked uphill by the fence, straight
            towards the boy.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“You'd better look out,”</span> the boys called after
            him; <span class="tei tei-q">“he won't be afraid of you. He will
            stab you in a minute, on the sly, as he did
            Krassotkin.”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boy waited
            for him without budging. Coming up to him, Alyosha saw facing him
            a child of about nine years old. He was an undersized weakly boy
            with a thin pale face, with large dark eyes that gazed at him
            vindictively. He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat,
            which he had monstrously outgrown. His bare arms stuck out beyond
            his sleeves. There was a large patch on the right knee of his
            trousers, and in his right boot just at the toe there was a big
            hole in the leather, carefully blackened with ink. Both the
            pockets of his great-coat were weighed down with stones. Alyosha
            stopped two steps in front of him, looking inquiringly at him.
            The boy, seeing at once from Alyosha's eyes that he wouldn't beat
            him, became less defiant, and addressed him first.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I am alone, and there are six of them. I'll beat
            them all, alone!”</span> he said suddenly, with flashing
            eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I think one of the stones must have hurt you
            badly,”</span> observed Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“But I hit Smurov on the head!”</span> cried the
            boy.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“They told me that you know me, and that you threw a
            stone at me on purpose,”</span> said Alyosha.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boy looked
            darkly at him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't know you. Do you know me?”</span> Alyosha
            continued.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Let me alone!”</span> the boy cried irritably; but
            he did not move, as <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page195">[pg
            195]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg195" name="Pg195"></a>
            though he were expecting something, and again there was a
            vindictive light in his eyes.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Very well, I am going,”</span> said Alyosha;
            <span class="tei tei-q">“only I don't know you and I don't tease
            you. They told me how they tease you, but I don't want to tease
            you. Good-by!”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Monk in silk trousers!”</span> cried the boy,
            following Alyosha with the same vindictive and defiant
            expression, and he threw himself into an attitude of defense,
            feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him; but Alyosha
            turned, looked at him, and walked away. He had not gone three
            steps before the biggest stone the boy had in his pocket hit him
            a painful blow in the back.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“So you'll hit a man from behind! They tell the
            truth, then, when they say that you attack on the sly,”</span>
            said Alyosha, turning round again. This time the boy threw a
            stone savagely right into Alyosha's face; but Alyosha just had
            time to guard himself, and the stone struck him on the elbow.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Aren't you ashamed? What have I done to you?”</span>
            he cried.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boy waited
            in silent defiance, certain that now Alyosha would attack him.
            Seeing that even now he would not, his rage was like a little
            wild beast's; he flew at Alyosha himself, and before Alyosha had
            time to move, the spiteful child had seized his left hand with
            both of his and bit his middle finger. He fixed his teeth in it
            and it was ten seconds before he let go. Alyosha cried out with
            pain and pulled his finger away with all his might. The child let
            go at last and retreated to his former distance. Alyosha's finger
            had been badly bitten to the bone, close to the nail; it began to
            bleed. Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightly
            round his injured hand. He was a full minute bandaging it. The
            boy stood waiting all the time. At last Alyosha raised his gentle
            eyes and looked at him.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Very well,”</span> he said, <span class="tei tei-q">“you see how badly you've bitten me. That's enough,
            isn't it? Now tell me, what have I done to you?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The boy stared
            in amazement.</p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Though I don't know you and it's the first time I've
            seen you,”</span> Alyosha went on with the same serenity,
            <span class="tei tei-q">“yet I must have done something to
            you—you wouldn't have hurt me like this for nothing. So what have
            I done? How have I wronged you, tell me?”</span></p>
<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Instead of
            answering, the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and
            <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page196">[pg 196]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg196" name="Pg196"></a> ran away. Alyosha
            walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street, and for a
            long time he saw the child running in the distance as fast as
            ever, not turning his head, and no doubt still keeping up his
            tearful wail. He made up his mind to find him out as soon as he
            had time, and to solve this mystery. Just now he had not the
            time.</p>
</div>
<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 3.00em; margin-bottom: 3.00em">
<a id="toc67" name="toc67"></a> <a id="pdf68" name="pdf68"></a>
</section></section></section></body></html>
