<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="book-3-2" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-3-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
					<h2 epub:type="title">
						<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">A Sudden Resolution</span>
					</h2>
					<p>She was sitting in the kitchen with her grandmother; they were both just going to bed. Relying on Nazar Ivanovitch, they had not locked themselves in. Mitya ran in, pounced on Fenya and seized her by the throat.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Speak at once! Where is she? With whom is she now, at Mokroe?”</span> he roared furiously.</p>
					<p>Both the women squealed.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Aie! I'll tell you. Aie! Dmitri Fyodorovitch, darling, I'll tell you everything directly, I won't hide anything,”</span> gabbled Fenya, frightened to death; <span class="tei tei-q">“she's gone to Mokroe, to her officer.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What officer?”</span> roared Mitya.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“To her officer, the same one she used to know, the one who threw her over five years ago,”</span> cackled Fenya, as fast as she could speak.</p>
					<p>Mitya withdrew the hands with which he was squeezing her throat. He stood facing her, pale as death, unable to utter a word, but his eyes showed that he realized it all, all, from the first word, and guessed the whole position. Poor Fenya was not in a condition at that moment to observe whether he understood or not. She remained sitting on the trunk as she had been when he ran into the room, trembling all over, holding her hands out before her as though trying to defend herself. She seemed to have grown rigid in that position. Her wide-opened, scared eyes were fixed immovably upon him. And to make matters worse, both his hands were smeared with blood. On the way, as he ran, he must have touched his forehead with them, wiping off the perspiration, so that on his forehead and his right cheek were blood-stained patches. Fenya was on the verge of hysterics. The old cook had jumped up and was staring at him like a mad woman, almost unconscious with terror.</p>
					<p>Mitya stood for a moment, then mechanically sank on to a chair next to Fenya. He sat, not reflecting but, as it were, terror-stricken, benumbed. Yet everything was clear as day: that officer, he knew about him, he knew everything perfectly, he had known it from Grushenka herself, had known that a letter had come from him a month before. So that for a month, for a whole month, this had been going on, a secret from him, till the very arrival of this new man, and he had never thought of him! But how could he, how could he not have thought of him? Why was it he had forgotten this officer, like that, forgotten him as soon as he heard of him? That was the question that faced him like some monstrous thing. And he looked at this monstrous thing with horror, growing cold with horror.</p>
					<p>But suddenly, as gently and mildly as a gentle and affectionate child, he began speaking to Fenya as though he had utterly forgotten how he had scared and hurt her just now. He fell to questioning Fenya with an extreme preciseness, astonishing in his position, and though the girl looked wildly at his blood-stained hands, she, too, with wonderful readiness and rapidity, answered every question as though eager to put the whole truth and nothing but the truth before him. Little by little, even with a sort of enjoyment, she began explaining every detail, not wanting to torment him, but, as it were, eager to be of the utmost service to him. She described the whole of that day, in great detail, the visit of Rakitin and Alyosha, how she, Fenya, had stood on the watch, how the mistress had set off, and how she had called out of the window to Alyosha to give him, Mitya, her greetings, and to tell him <span class="tei tei-q">“to remember for ever how she had loved him for an hour.”</span></p>
					<p>Hearing of the message, Mitya suddenly smiled, and there was a flush of color on his pale cheeks. At the same moment Fenya said to him, not a bit afraid now to be inquisitive:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Look at your hands, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. They're all over blood!”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes,”</span> answered Mitya mechanically. He looked carelessly at his hands and at once forgot them and Fenya's question.</p>
					<p>He sank into silence again. Twenty minutes had passed since he had run in. His first horror was over, but evidently some new fixed determination had taken possession of him. He suddenly stood up, smiling dreamily.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What has happened to you, sir?”</span> said Fenya, pointing to his hands again. She spoke compassionately, as though she felt very near to him now in his grief. Mitya looked at his hands again.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“That's blood, Fenya,”</span> he said, looking at her with a strange expression. <span class="tei tei-q">“That's human blood, and my God! why was it shed? But ... Fenya ... there's a fence here”</span> (he looked at her as though setting her a riddle), <span class="tei tei-q">“a high fence, and terrible to look at. But at dawn to-morrow, when the sun rises, Mitya will leap over that fence.... You don't understand what fence, Fenya, and, never mind.... You'll hear to-morrow and understand ... and now, good-by. I won't stand in her way. I'll step aside, I know how to step aside. Live, my joy.... You loved me for an hour, remember Mityenka Karamazov so for ever.... She always used to call me Mityenka, do you remember?”</span></p>
					<p>And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen. Fenya was almost more frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when he ran in and attacked her.</p>
					<p>Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, the young official with whom he had pawned his pistols. It was by now half-past eight, and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea, and had just put his coat on again to go to the <span class="tei tei-q">“Metropolis”</span> to play billiards. Mitya caught him coming out.</p>
					<p>Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood, the young man uttered a cry of surprise.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Good heavens! What is the matter?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I've come for my pistols,”</span> said Mitya, <span class="tei tei-q">“and brought you the money. And thanks very much. I'm in a hurry, Pyotr Ilyitch, please make haste.”</span></p>
					<p>Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised; he suddenly caught sight of a bundle of bank-notes in Mitya's hand, and what was more, he had walked in holding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries money: he had them in his right hand, and held them outstretched as if to show them. Perhotin's servant-boy, who met Mitya in the passage, said afterwards that he walked into the passage in the same way, with the money outstretched in his hand, so he must have been carrying them like that even in the streets. They were all rainbow-colored hundred-rouble notes, and the fingers holding them were covered with blood.</p>
					<p>When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money, he said that it was difficult to judge at a glance, but that it might have been two thousand, or perhaps three, but it was a big, <span class="tei tei-q">“fat”</span> bundle. <span class="tei tei-q">“Dmitri Fyodorovitch,”</span> so he testified afterwards, <span class="tei tei-q">“seemed unlike himself, too; not drunk, but, as it were, exalted, lost to everything, but at the same time, as it were, absorbed, as though pondering and searching for something and unable to come to a decision. He was in great haste, answered abruptly and very strangely, and at moments seemed not at all dejected but quite cheerful.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“But what <em>is</em> the matter with you? What's wrong?”</span> cried Pyotr Ilyitch, looking wildly at his guest. <span class="tei tei-q">“How is it that you're all covered with blood? Have you had a fall? Look at yourself!”</span></p>
					<p>He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass.</p>
					<p>Seeing his blood-stained face, Mitya started and scowled wrathfully.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Damnation! That's the last straw,”</span> he muttered angrily, hurriedly changing the notes from his right hand to the left, and impulsively jerked the handkerchief out of his pocket. But the handkerchief turned out to be soaked with blood, too (it was the handkerchief he had used to wipe Grigory's face). There was scarcely a white spot on it, and it had not merely begun to dry, but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and could not be pulled apart. Mitya threw it angrily on the floor.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, damn it!”</span> he said. <span class="tei tei-q">“Haven't you a rag of some sort ... to wipe my face?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“So you're only stained, not wounded? You'd better wash,”</span> said Pyotr Ilyitch. <span class="tei tei-q">“Here's a wash-stand. I'll pour you out some water.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“A wash-stand? That's all right ... but where am I to put this?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred-rouble notes, looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him to decide what he, Mitya, was to do with his own money.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“In your pocket, or on the table here. They won't be lost.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“In my pocket? Yes, in my pocket. All right.... But, I say, that's all nonsense,”</span> he cried, as though suddenly coming out of his absorption. <span class="tei tei-q">“Look here, let's first settle that business of the pistols. Give them back to me. Here's your money ... because I am in great need of them ... and I haven't a minute, a minute to spare.”</span></p>
					<p>And taking the topmost note from the bundle he held it out to Pyotr Ilyitch.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“But I shan't have change enough. Haven't you less?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“No,”</span> said Mitya, looking again at the bundle, and as though not trusting his own words he turned over two or three of the topmost ones.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“No, they're all alike,”</span> he added, and again he looked inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“How have you grown so rich?”</span> the latter asked. <span class="tei tei-q">“Wait, I'll send my boy to Plotnikov's, they close late—to see if they won't change it. Here, Misha!”</span> he called into the passage.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“To Plotnikov's shop—first-rate!”</span> cried Mitya, as though struck by an idea. <span class="tei tei-q">“Misha,”</span> he turned to the boy as he came in, <span class="tei tei-q">“look here, run to Plotnikov's and tell them that Dmitri Fyodorovitch sends his greetings, and will be there directly.... But listen, listen, tell them to have champagne, three dozen bottles, ready before I come, and packed as it was to take to Mokroe. I took four dozen with me then,”</span> he added (suddenly addressing Pyotr Ilyitch); <span class="tei tei-q">“they know all about it, don't you trouble, Misha,”</span> he turned again to the boy. <span class="tei tei-q">“Stay, listen; tell them to put in cheese, Strasburg pies, smoked fish, ham, caviare, and everything, everything they've got, up to a hundred roubles, or a hundred and twenty as before.... But wait: don't let them forget dessert, sweets, pears, water-melons, two or three or four—no, one melon's enough, and chocolate, candy, toffee, fondants; in fact, everything I took to Mokroe before, three hundred roubles' worth with the champagne ... let it be just the same again. And remember, Misha, if you are called Misha—His name is Misha, isn't it?”</span> He turned to Pyotr Ilyitch again.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Wait a minute,”</span> Protr Ilyitch intervened, listening and watching him uneasily, <span class="tei tei-q">“you'd better go yourself and tell them. He'll muddle it.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“He will, I see he will! Eh, Misha! Why, I was going to kiss you for the commission.... If you don't make a mistake, there's ten roubles for you, run along, make haste.... Champagne's the chief thing, let them bring up champagne. And brandy, too, and red and white wine, and all I had then.... They know what I had then.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“But listen!”</span> Pyotr Ilyitch interrupted with some impatience. <span class="tei tei-q">“I say, let him simply run and change the money and tell them not to close, and you go and tell them.... Give him your note. Be off, Misha! Put your best leg forward!”</span></p>
					<p>Pyotr Ilyitch seemed to hurry Misha off on purpose, because the boy remained standing with his mouth and eyes wide open, apparently understanding little of Mitya's orders, gazing up with amazement and terror at his blood-stained face and the trembling bloodstained fingers that held the notes.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, now come and wash,”</span> said Pyotr Ilyitch sternly. <span class="tei tei-q">“Put the money on the table or else in your pocket.... That's right, come along. But take off your coat.”</span></p>
					<p>And beginning to help him off with his coat, he cried out again:</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Look, your coat's covered with blood, too!”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“That ... it's not the coat. It's only a little here on the sleeve.... And that's only here where the handkerchief lay. It must have soaked through. I must have sat on the handkerchief at Fenya's, and the blood's come through,”</span> Mitya explained at once with a childlike unconsciousness that was astounding. Pyotr Ilyitch listened, frowning.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, you must have been up to something; you must have been fighting with some one,”</span> he muttered.</p>
					<p>They began to wash. Pyotr Ilyitch held the jug and poured out the water. Mitya, in desperate haste, scarcely soaped his hands (they were trembling, and Pyotr Ilyitch remembered it afterwards). But the young official insisted on his soaping them thoroughly and rubbing them more. He seemed to exercise more and more sway over Mitya, as time went on. It may be noted in passing that he was a young man of sturdy character.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Look, you haven't got your nails clean. Now rub your face; here, on your temples, by your ear.... Will you go in that shirt? Where are you going? Look, all the cuff of your right sleeve is covered with blood.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, it's all bloody,”</span> observed Mitya, looking at the cuff of his shirt.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Then change your shirt.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I haven't time. You see I'll ...”</span> Mitya went on with the same confiding ingenuousness, drying his face and hands on the towel, and putting on his coat. <span class="tei tei-q">“I'll turn it up at the wrist. It won't be seen under the coat.... You see!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Tell me now, what game have you been up to? Have you been fighting with some one? In the tavern again, as before? Have you been beating that captain again?”</span> Pyotr Ilyitch asked him reproachfully. <span class="tei tei-q">“Whom have you been beating now ... or killing, perhaps?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Nonsense!”</span> said Mitya.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Why <span class="tei tei-q">‘nonsense’</span>?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't worry,”</span> said Mitya, and he suddenly laughed. <span class="tei tei-q">“I smashed an old woman in the market-place just now.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Smashed? An old woman?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“An old man!”</span> cried Mitya, looking Pyotr Ilyitch straight in the face, laughing, and shouting at him as though he were deaf.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Confound it! An old woman, an old man.... Have you killed some one?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“We made it up. We had a row—and made it up. In a place I know of. We parted friends. A fool.... He's forgiven me.... He's sure to have forgiven me by now ... if he had got up, he wouldn't have forgiven me”</span>—Mitya suddenly winked—<span class="tei tei-q">“only damn him, you know, I say, Pyotr Ilyitch, damn him! Don't worry about him! I don't want to just now!”</span> Mitya snapped out, resolutely.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Whatever do you want to go picking quarrels with every one for? ... Just as you did with that captain over some nonsense.... You've been fighting and now you're rushing off on the spree—that's you all over! Three dozen champagne—what do you want all that for?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Bravo! Now give me the pistols. Upon my honor I've no time now. I should like to have a chat with you, my dear boy, but I haven't the time. And there's no need, it's too late for talking. Where's my money? Where have I put it?”</span> he cried, thrusting his hands into his pockets.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You put it on the table ... yourself.... Here it is. Had you forgotten? Money's like dirt or water to you, it seems. Here are your pistols. It's an odd thing, at six o'clock you pledged them for ten roubles, and now you've got thousands. Two or three I should say.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Three, you bet,”</span> laughed Mitya, stuffing the notes into the side-pocket of his trousers.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You'll lose it like that. Have you found a gold-mine?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The mines? The gold-mines?”</span> Mitya shouted at the top of his voice and went off into a roar of laughter. <span class="tei tei-q">“Would you like to go to the mines, Perhotin? There's a lady here who'll stump up three thousand for you, if only you'll go. She did it for me, she's so awfully fond of gold-mines. Do you know Madame Hohlakov?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I don't know her, but I've heard of her and seen her. Did she really give you three thousand? Did she really?”</span> said Pyotr Ilyitch, eyeing him dubiously.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“As soon as the sun rises to-morrow, as soon as Phœbus, ever young, flies upwards, praising and glorifying God, you go to her, this Madame Hohlakov, and ask her whether she did stump up that three thousand or not. Try and find out.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I don't know on what terms you are ... since you say it so positively, I suppose she did give it to you. You've got the money in your hand, but instead of going to Siberia you're spending it all.... Where are you really off to now, eh?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“To Mokroe.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“To Mokroe? But it's night!”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Once the lad had all, now the lad has naught,”</span> cried Mitya suddenly.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“How <span class="tei tei-q">‘naught’</span>? You say that with all those thousands!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I'm not talking about thousands. Damn thousands! I'm talking of the female character.</span>
					</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">Fickle is the heart of woman</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">Treacherous and full of vice;</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">I agree with Ulysses. That's what he says.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I don't understand you!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Am I drunk?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Not drunk, but worse.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I'm drunk in spirit, Pyotr Ilyitch, drunk in spirit! But that's enough!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What are you doing, loading the pistol?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I'm loading the pistol.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Unfastening the pistol-case, Mitya actually opened the powder horn, and carefully sprinkled and rammed in the charge. Then he took the bullet and, before inserting it, held it in two fingers in front of the candle.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Why are you looking at the bullet?”</span> asked Pyotr Ilyitch, watching him with uneasy curiosity.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, a fancy. Why, if you meant to put that bullet in your brain, would you look at it or not?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Why look at it?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It's going into my brain, so it's interesting to look and see what it's like. But that's foolishness, a moment's foolishness. Now that's done,”</span> he added, putting in the bullet and driving it home with the ramrod. <span class="tei tei-q">“Pyotr Ilyitch, my dear fellow, that's nonsense, all nonsense, and if only you knew what nonsense! Give me a little piece of paper now.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Here's some paper.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“No, a clean new piece, writing-paper. That's right.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>And taking a pen from the table, Mitya rapidly wrote two lines, folded the paper in four, and thrust it in his waistcoat pocket. He put the pistols in the case, locked it up, and kept it in his hand. Then he looked at Pyotr Ilyitch with a slow, thoughtful smile.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Now, let's go.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Where are we going? No, wait a minute.... Are you thinking of putting that bullet in your brain, perhaps?”</span> Pyotr Ilyitch asked uneasily.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I was fooling about the bullet! I want to live. I love life! You may be sure of that. I love golden-haired Phœbus and his warm light.... Dear Pyotr Ilyitch, do you know how to step aside?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What do you mean by <span class="tei tei-q">‘stepping aside’</span>?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Making way. Making way for a dear creature, and for one I hate. And to let the one I hate become dear—that's what making way means! And to say to them: God bless you, go your way, pass on, while I—”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“While you—?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That's enough, let's go.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Upon my word. I'll tell some one to prevent your going there,”</span> said Pyotr Ilyitch, looking at him. <span class="tei tei-q">“What are you going to Mokroe for, now?”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“There's a woman there, a woman. That's enough for you. You shut up.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Listen, though you're such a savage I've always liked you.... I feel anxious.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Thanks, old fellow. I'm a savage you say. Savages, savages! That's what I am always saying. Savages! Why, here's Misha! I was forgetting him.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Misha ran in, post-haste, with a handful of notes in change, and reported that every one was in a bustle at the Plotnikovs'; <span class="tei tei-q">“They're carrying down the bottles, and the fish, and the tea; it will all be ready directly.”</span> Mitya seized ten roubles and handed it to Pyotr Ilyitch, then tossed another ten-rouble note to Misha.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Don't dare to do such a thing!”</span> cried Pyotr Ilyitch. <span class="tei tei-q">“I won't have it in my house, it's a bad, demoralizing habit. Put your money away. Here, put it here, why waste it? It would come in handy to-morrow, and I dare say you'll be coming to me to borrow ten roubles again. Why do you keep putting the notes in your side-pocket? Ah, you'll lose them!”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I say, my dear fellow, let's go to Mokroe together.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What should I go for?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I say, let's open a bottle at once, and drink to life! I want to drink, and especially to drink with you. I've never drunk with you, have I?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Very well, we can go to the <span class="tei tei-q">‘Metropolis.’</span> I was just going there.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I haven't time for that. Let's drink at the Plotnikovs', in the back room. Shall I ask you a riddle?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Ask away.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Mitya took the piece of paper out of his waistcoat pocket, unfolded it and showed it. In a large, distinct hand was written: <span class="tei tei-q">“I punish myself for my whole life, my whole life I punish!”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I will certainly speak to some one, I'll go at once,”</span> said Pyotr Ilyitch, after reading the paper.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You won't have time, dear boy, come and have a drink. March!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Plotnikov's shop was at the corner of the street, next door but one to Pyotr Ilyitch's. It was the largest grocery shop in our town, and by no means a bad one, belonging to some rich merchants. They kept everything that could be got in a Petersburg shop, grocery of all sort, wines <span class="tei tei-q">“bottled by the brothers Eliseyev,”</span> fruits, cigars, tea, coffee, sugar, and so on. There were three shop-assistants and two errand boys always employed. Though our part of the country had grown poorer, the landowners had gone away, and trade had got worse, yet the grocery stores flourished as before, every year with increasing prosperity; there were plenty of purchasers for their goods.</p>
					<p>They were awaiting Mitya with impatience in the shop. They had vivid recollections of how he had bought, three or four weeks ago, wine and goods of all sorts to the value of several hundred roubles, paid for in cash (they would never have let him have anything on credit, of course). They remembered that then, as now, he had had a bundle of hundred-rouble notes in his hand, and had scattered them at random, without bargaining, without reflecting, or caring to reflect what use so much wine and provisions would be to him. The story was told all over the town that, driving off then with Grushenka to Mokroe, he had <span class="tei tei-q">“spent three thousand in one night and the following day, and had come back from the spree without a penny.”</span> He had picked up a whole troop of gypsies (encamped in our neighborhood at the time), who for two days got money without stint out of him while he was drunk, and drank expensive wine without stint. People used to tell, laughing at Mitya, how he had given champagne to grimy-handed peasants, and feasted the village women and girls on sweets and Strasburg pies. Though to laugh at Mitya to his face was rather a risky proceeding, there was much laughter behind his back, especially in the tavern, at his own ingenuous public avowal that all he had got out of Grushenka by this <span class="tei tei-q">“escapade”</span> was <span class="tei tei-q">“permission to kiss her foot, and that was the utmost she had allowed him.”</span></p>
					<p>By the time Mitya and Pyotr Ilyitch reached the shop, they found a cart with three horses harnessed abreast with bells, and with Andrey, the driver, ready waiting for Mitya at the entrance. In the shop they had almost entirely finished packing one box of provisions, and were only waiting for Mitya's arrival to nail it down and put it in the cart. Pyotr Ilyitch was astounded.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Where did this cart come from in such a hurry?”</span> he asked Mitya.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I met Andrey as I ran to you, and told him to drive straight here to the shop. There's no time to lose. Last time I drove with Timofey, but Timofey now has gone on before me with the witch. Shall we be very late, Andrey?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“They'll only get there an hour at most before us, not even that maybe. I got Timofey ready to start. I know how he'll go. Their pace won't be ours, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. How could it be? They won't get there an hour earlier!”</span> Andrey, a lanky, red-haired, middle-aged driver, wearing a full-skirted coat, and with a kaftan on his arm, replied warmly.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Fifty roubles for vodka if we're only an hour behind them.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I warrant the time, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. Ech, they won't be half an hour before us, let alone an hour.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Though Mitya bustled about seeing after things, he gave his orders strangely, as it were disconnectedly, and inconsecutively. He began a sentence and forgot the end of it. Pyotr Ilyitch found himself obliged to come to the rescue.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Four hundred roubles' worth, not less than four hundred roubles' worth, just as it was then,”</span> commanded Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“Four dozen champagne, not a bottle less.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What do you want with so much? What's it for? Stay!”</span> cried Pyotr Ilyitch. <span class="tei tei-q">“What's this box? What's in it? Surely there isn't four hundred roubles' worth here?”</span></p>
					<p>The officious shopmen began explaining with oily politeness that the first box contained only half a dozen bottles of champagne, and only <span class="tei tei-q">“the most indispensable articles,”</span> such as savories, sweets, toffee, etc. But the main part of the goods ordered would be packed and sent off, as on the previous occasion, in a special cart also with three horses traveling at full speed, so that it would arrive not more than an hour later than Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Not more than an hour! Not more than an hour! And put in more toffee and fondants. The girls there are so fond of it,”</span> Mitya insisted hotly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The fondants are all right. But what do you want with four dozen of champagne? One would be enough,”</span> said Pyotr Ilyitch, almost angry. He began bargaining, asking for a bill of the goods, and refused to be satisfied. But he only succeeded in saving a hundred roubles. In the end it was agreed that only three hundred roubles' worth should be sent.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Well, you may go to the devil!”</span> cried Pyotr Ilyitch, on second thoughts. <span class="tei tei-q">“What's it to do with me? Throw away your money, since it's cost you nothing.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“This way, my economist, this way, don't be angry.”</span> Mitya drew him into a room at the back of the shop. <span class="tei tei-q">“They'll give us a bottle here directly. We'll taste it. Ech, Pyotr Ilyitch, come along with me, for you're a nice fellow, the sort I like.”</span></p>
					<p>Mitya sat down on a wicker chair, before a little table, covered with a dirty dinner-napkin. Pyotr Ilyitch sat down opposite, and the champagne soon appeared, and oysters were suggested to the gentlemen. <span class="tei tei-q">“First-class oysters, the last lot in.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Hang the oysters. I don't eat them. And we don't need anything,”</span> cried Pyotr Ilyitch, almost angrily.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“There's no time for oysters,”</span> said Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“And I'm not hungry. Do you know, friend,”</span> he said suddenly, with feeling, <span class="tei tei-q">“I never have liked all this disorder.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Who does like it? Three dozen of champagne for peasants, upon my word, that's enough to make any one angry!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That's not what I mean. I'm talking of a higher order. There's no order in me, no higher order. But ... that's all over. There's no need to grieve about it. It's too late, damn it! My whole life has been disorder, and one must set it in order. Is that a pun, eh?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You're raving, not making puns!”</span>
					</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">Glory be to God in Heaven,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">Glory be to God in me....</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That verse came from my heart once, it's not a verse, but a tear.... I made it myself ... not while I was pulling the captain's beard, though....”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Why do you bring him in all of a sudden?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Why do I bring him in? Foolery! All things come to an end; all things are made equal. That's the long and short of it.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You know, I keep thinking of your pistols.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“That's all foolery, too! Drink, and don't be fanciful. I love life. I've loved life too much, shamefully much. Enough! Let's drink to life, dear boy, I propose the toast. Why am I pleased with myself? I'm a scoundrel, but I'm satisfied with myself. And yet I'm tortured by the thought that I'm a scoundrel, but satisfied with myself. I bless the creation. I'm ready to bless God and His creation directly, but ... I must kill one noxious insect for fear it should crawl and spoil life for others.... Let us drink to life, dear brother. What can be more precious than life? Nothing! To life, and to one queen of queens!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Let's drink to life and to your queen, too, if you like.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>They drank a glass each. Although Mitya was excited and expansive, yet he was melancholy, too. It was as though some heavy, overwhelming anxiety were weighing upon him.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Misha ... here's your Misha come! Misha, come here, my boy, drink this glass to Phœbus, the golden-haired, of to-morrow morn....”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What are you giving it him for?”</span> cried Pyotr Ilyitch, irritably.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Yes, yes, yes, let me! I want to!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“E—ech!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Misha emptied the glass, bowed, and ran out.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He'll remember it afterwards,”</span> Mitya remarked. <span class="tei tei-q">“Woman, I love woman! What is woman? The queen of creation! My heart is sad, my heart is sad, Pyotr Ilyitch. Do you remember Hamlet? <span class="tei tei-q">‘I am very sorry, good Horatio! Alas, poor Yorick!’</span> Perhaps that's me, Yorick? Yes, I'm Yorick now, and a skull afterwards.”</span></p>
					<p>Pyotr Ilyitch listened in silence. Mitya, too, was silent for a while.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What dog's that you've got here?”</span> he asked the shopman, casually, noticing a pretty little lap-dog with dark eyes, sitting in the corner.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“It belongs to Varvara Alexyevna, the mistress,”</span> answered the clerk. <span class="tei tei-q">“She brought it and forgot it here. It must be taken back to her.”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I saw one like it ... in the regiment ...”</span> murmured Mitya dreamily, <span class="tei tei-q">“only that one had its hind leg broken.... By the way, Pyotr Ilyitch, I wanted to ask you: have you ever stolen anything in your life?”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“What a question!”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, I didn't mean anything. From somebody's pocket, you know. I don't mean government money, every one steals that, and no doubt you do, too....”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“You go to the devil.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I'm talking of other people's money. Stealing straight out of a pocket? Out of a purse, eh?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I stole twenty copecks from my mother when I was nine years old. I took it off the table on the sly, and held it tight in my hand.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Well, and what happened?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, nothing. I kept it three days, then I felt ashamed, confessed, and gave it back.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“And what then?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Naturally I was whipped. But why do you ask? Have you stolen something?”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I have,”</span> said Mitya, winking slyly.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“What have you stolen?”</span> inquired Pyotr Ilyitch curiously.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“I stole twenty copecks from my mother when I was nine years old, and gave it back three days after.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>As he said this, Mitya suddenly got up.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, won't you come now?”</span> called Andrey from the door of the shop.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Are you ready? We'll come!”</span> Mitya started. <span class="tei tei-q">“A few more last words and—Andrey, a glass of vodka at starting. Give him some brandy as well! That box”</span> (the one with the pistols) <span class="tei tei-q">“put under my seat. Good-by, Pyotr Ilyitch, don't remember evil against me.”</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“But you're coming back to-morrow?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Of course.”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Will you settle the little bill now?”</span> cried the clerk, springing forward.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, yes, the bill. Of course.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>He pulled the bundle of notes out of his pocket again, picked out three hundred roubles, threw them on the counter, and ran hurriedly out of the shop. Every one followed him out, bowing and wishing him good luck. Andrey, coughing from the brandy he had just swallowed, jumped up on the box. But Mitya was only just taking his seat when suddenly to his surprise he saw Fenya before him. She ran up panting, clasped her hands before him with a cry, and plumped down at his feet.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear good Dmitri Fyodorovitch, don't harm my mistress. And it was I told you all about it.... And don't murder him, he came first, he's hers! He'll marry Agrafena Alexandrovna now. That's why he's come back from Siberia. Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear, don't take a fellow creature's life!”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Tut—tut—tut! That's it, is it? So you're off there to make trouble!”</span> muttered Pyotr Ilyitch. <span class="tei tei-q">“Now, it's all clear, as clear as daylight. Dmitri Fyodorovitch, give me your pistols at once if you mean to behave like a man,”</span> he shouted aloud to Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“Do you hear, Dmitri?”</span></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The pistols? Wait a bit, brother, I'll throw them into the pool on the road,”</span> answered Mitya. <span class="tei tei-q">“Fenya, get up, don't kneel to me. Mitya won't hurt any one, the silly fool won't hurt any one again. But I say, Fenya,”</span> he shouted, after having taken his seat. <span class="tei tei-q">“I hurt you just now, so forgive me and have pity on me, forgive a scoundrel.... But it doesn't matter if you don't. It's all the same now. Now then, Andrey, look alive, fly along full speed!”</span></p>
					<p>Andrey whipped up the horses, and the bells began ringing.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Good-by, Pyotr Ilyitch! My last tear is for you!...”</span>
					</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He's not drunk, but he keeps babbling like a lunatic,”</span> Pyotr Ilyitch thought as he watched him go. He had half a mind to stay and see the cart packed with the remaining wines and provisions, knowing that they would deceive and defraud Mitya. But, suddenly feeling vexed with himself, he turned away with a curse and went to the tavern to play billiards.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“He's a fool, though he's a good fellow,”</span> he muttered as he went. <span class="tei tei-q">“I've heard of that officer, Grushenka's former flame. Well, if he has turned up.... Ech, those pistols! Damn it all! I'm not his nurse! Let them do what they like! Besides, it'll all come to nothing. They're a set of brawlers, that's all. They'll drink and fight, fight and make friends again. They are not men who do anything real. What does he mean by <span class="tei tei-q">‘I'm stepping aside, I'm punishing myself?’</span> It'll come to nothing! He's shouted such phrases a thousand times, drunk, in the taverns. But now he's not drunk. <span class="tei tei-q">‘Drunk in spirit’</span>—they're fond of fine phrases, the villains. Am I his nurse? He must have been fighting, his face was all over blood. With whom? I shall find out at the <span class="tei tei-q">‘Metropolis.’</span> And his handkerchief was soaked in blood.... It's still lying on my floor.... Hang it!”</span></p>
					<p>He reached the tavern in a bad humor and at once made up a game. The game cheered him. He played a second game, and suddenly began telling one of his partners that Dmitri Karamazov had come in for some cash again—something like three thousand roubles, and had gone to Mokroe again to spend it with Grushenka.... This news roused singular interest in his listeners. They all spoke of it, not laughing, but with a strange gravity. They left off playing.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Three thousand? But where can he have got three thousand?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Questions were asked. The story of Madame Hohlakov's present was received with skepticism.</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Hasn't he robbed his old father?—that's the question.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Three thousand! There's something odd about it.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“He boasted aloud that he would kill his father; we all heard him, here. And it was three thousand he talked about ...”</span>
					</p>
					<p>Pyotr Ilyitch listened. All at once he became short and dry in his answers. He said not a word about the blood on Mitya's face and hands, though he had meant to speak of it at first.</p>
					<p>They began a third game, and by degrees the talk about Mitya died away. But by the end of the third game, Pyotr Ilyitch felt no more desire for billiards; he laid down the cue, and without having supper as he had intended, he walked out of the tavern. When he reached the market-place he stood still in perplexity, wondering at himself. He realized that what he wanted was to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch's and find out if anything had happened there. <span class="tei tei-q">“On account of some stupid nonsense—as it's sure to turn out—am I going to wake up the household and make a scandal? Fooh! damn it, is it my business to look after them?”</span></p>
					<p>In a very bad humor he went straight home, and suddenly remembered Fenya. <span class="tei tei-q">“Damn it all! I ought to have questioned her just now,”</span> he thought with vexation, <span class="tei tei-q">“I should have heard everything.”</span> And the desire to speak to her, and so find out, became so pressing and importunate that when he was half-way home he turned abruptly and went towards the house where Grushenka lodged. Going up to the gate he knocked. The sound of the knock in the silence of the night sobered him and made him feel annoyed. And no one answered him; every one in the house was asleep.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“And I shall be making a fuss!”</span> he thought, with a feeling of positive discomfort. But instead of going away altogether, he fell to knocking again with all his might, filling the street with clamor.</p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Not coming? Well, I will knock them up, I will!”</span> he muttered at each knock, fuming at himself, but at the same time he redoubled his knocks on the gate.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
